Seller-Brison, C., et al. (2024). "Adaptation towards catabolic biodegradation of trace organic contaminants in activated sludge." Water Res 266: 122431.
	Trace organic contaminants (TrOCs) are omnipresent in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), yet, their removal during wastewater treatment is oftentimes incomplete and underlying biotransformation mechanisms are not fully understood. In this study, we elucidate how different factors, including pre-exposure levels and duration, influence microbial adaptation towards catabolic TrOC biodegradation and its potential role in biological wastewater treatment. Four sequencing batch reactors (SBRs) were operated in parallel in three succeeding phases, adding and removing a selection of 26 TrOCs at different concentration levels. After each phase of SBR operation, a series of batch experiments was conducted to monitor biotransformation kinetics of those same TrOCs across various spike concentrations. For half of our test TrOCs, we detected increased biotransformation in sludge pre-exposed to TrOC concentrations ≥5 µg L(-1) over a 30-day period, with most significant differences observed for the insect repellent DEET and the artificial sweetener saccharin. Accordingly, 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing revealed enrichment of taxa that have previously been linked to catabolic biodegradation of several test TrOCs, e.g., Bosea sp. and Shinella sp. for acesulfame degradation, and Pseudomonas sp. for caffeine, cyclamate, DEET, metformin, paracetamol, and isoproturon degradation. We further conducted shotgun metagenomics to query for gene products previously reported to be involved in the TrOCs' biodegradation pathways. In the future, directed microbial adaptation may be a solution to improve bioremediation of TrOCs in contaminated environments or in WWTPs.

Semblante, G. U., et al. (2017). "Fate of trace organic contaminants in oxic-settling-anoxic (OSA) process applied for biosolids reduction during wastewater treatment." Bioresour. Technol. 240: 181-191.
	This study investigated the fate of trace organic contaminants (TrOCs) in an oxic-settling-anoxic (OSA) process consisting of a sequencing batch reactor (SBR) with external aerobic/anoxic and anoxic reactors. OSA did not neg. affect TrOC removal of the SBR. Generally, low TrOC removal was observed under anoxic and low substrate conditions, implicating the role of co-metabolism in TrOC biodegradation Several TrOCs that were recalcitrant in the SBR (e.g., benzotriazole) were biodegraded in the external aerobic/anoxic reactor. Some hydrophobic TrOCs (e.g., triclosan) were desorbed in the anoxic reactor possibly due to loss of sorption sites through volatile solids destruction. In OSA, the sludge was discharged from the aerobic/anoxic reactor which contained lower concentration of TrOCs (e.g., triclosan and triclocarban) than that of the control aerobic digester, suggesting that OSA can also help to reduce TrOC concentration in residual biosolids.

Shahid, N., et al. (2025). "Mixtures of toxic organic micropollutants compromise the safety of water resources in urban agglomerations in low- and medium-income countries: The example of Lahore, Pakistan." Environ. Pollut. (Oxford, U. K.) 365: 125383.
	Contamination of water resources with mixtures of organic micropollutants (OMP) including pesticides, pharmaceuticals, and industrial chems. is a serious threat to aquatic organisms and human health. Long-term exposure to such pollutants may cause detrimental effects even at very low concentrations Water resources in urban agglomerations in low- and medium-income countries may be under particular pressure due to high population densities, significant industrial activities, and limited water treatment and management resources. In these areas, many inhabitants directly rely on healthy urban water resources. Using the agglomeration of Lahore, Pakistan, as a case, we studied the occurrence, spatial distribution, and toxic risks of OMP mixtures in different urban water resources using target screening with liquid chromatog. high-resolution mass spectrometry. In total, 266 of 576 target analytes were detected in at least one of the 200 samples taken from groundwater, canals, River Ravi and drains within the urban agglomeration. Notably, very high concentrations ranging from 10 to over 100μg L-1 were found for highly toxic pesticides including several fungicides such as picoxystrobin, the transformation product phthalamic acid, and imazalil, the insecticide etofenprox but also industrial chems. stemming for example from traffic such as 2-naphthalene sulfonic acid. Our study revealed high toxic risks particularly for invertebrates, fish and algae, with etofenprox as a dominant risk driver. This compound is extensively used in Lahore to control insect vectors of malaria and dengue fever in the urban agglomeration. Mixture risks were assessed using a toxic unit (TU) approach based on organism group specific effect concentrations, complemented with a risk quotient (RQ) approach using the lowest predicted no effect concentrations (PNECs). Acute and chronic risk thresholds were frequently exceeded, often by many orders of magnitude. These very high mixture risks strongly exceed those with previous studies in Europe, Africa and South America.

Shao, X. T., et al. (2024). "Taste traces: Capsaicin and sweeteners as anthropogenic markers in municipal wastewater." Sci Total Environ 912: 169194.
	Dietary-derived substances possess significant potential as anthropogenic markers owing to the large consumption and different intake habit. To investigate and evaluate such markers, wastewater samples from 35 wastewater treatment plants across 29 Chinese cities were collected to analyze artificial sweeteners (acesulfame and cyclamate) and natural spicy compounds (capsaicin and dihydrocapsaicin). Acesulfame (mean: 14.6 μg/L), cyclamate (mean: 24.3 μg/L), and capsaicin (mean: 101 ng/L) can be further investigated as anthropogenic markers due to their high detection frequency at high concentrations. Spatial use patterns revealed that acesulfame (5.31 g/d/1000 inhabitants (inh)) and cyclamate (8.16 g/d/1000 inh) use in northern China notably surpassed that in southern China (1.79 g/d/1000 inh and 3.23 g/d/1000 inh, p < 0.05). Conversely, chili pepper use was significantly higher (p < 0.05) in southern China (6702 g/d/1000 inh) than in northern China (2751 g/d/1000 inh), signifying a preference for sweetness in the northern regions and a predilection for spiciness in the southern regions. The total annual use of acesulfame (1842 t), cyclamate (3110 t), and chili (18.4 million tonnes) in China was estimated by this study, which was close to the national statistical production. In addition, sweetener use was negatively associated with the elderly population ratio, suggesting that the elderly population might not consume sweet foods. This study reveals the dietary sources of anthropogenic markers, highlighting the need for further research on the environmental implications of such markers.

Slosarczyk, K. and D. Dabrowska (2025). "A closed municipal landfill as a source of emerging contaminants in adjacent groundwater: pharmaceuticals and personal care products occurrence and environmental risk assessment." J. Hydrol. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 654: 132829.
	The aim of this study was to determine the occurrence and perform the environmental risk assessment (ERA) for emerging contaminants, primarily pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs), in the groundwater near a closed municipal landfill, on the example of a site in Tychy (southern Poland). Groundwater from a shallow aquifer was sampled in two seasons from eight piezometers located upstream, downstream, and on top of the landfill. The anal. covered 128 PPCPs. Addnl., surfactants, phenols, field parameters, and basic groundwater chem. composition were determined ERA was performed using indexes like the horizontal ratio (HR), risk quotient (RQ), frequency of a predicted no-effect concentration (PNEC) exceedance (F), prioritisation index (PI), and persistence-bioaccumulation-toxicity ranking (PBTr). The number of detected PPCPs in the groundwater reached up to 54, with total PPCP concentrations ranging from 492 to 3,230,036 ng/L. The study also revealed the presence of phenols (up to 62 mg/L) and surface active agents, particularly anionic surfactants (up to 77.7 mg/L). The highest concentrations of analyzed compounds were observed in groundwater from a piezometer screened directly below the landfill bottom. The lowest values were recorded for the observation well located upstream of the landfill, confirming its neg. impact and the release of PPCPs into the aquifer. The influence of the landfill was also reflected by low HR values (below 1) and high values of the site-specific risk quotient (above 1). Based on PI results, ibuprofen, bisphenol A, propyphenazone, and sulfamerazine were considered the compounds of highest risk. The same substances were among compounds with the highest PBTr values. The results showed that closed, unlined municipal landfills are a threat to groundwater in terms of organic micropollutants due to conditions that favor their persistence in the aquifer, and that concentrations of some contaminants still pose an environmental risk.

Slosarczyk, K. and A. J. Witkowski (2024). "Screening of pharmaceuticals and personal care products in the water environment of a region diversified in land use and urban development (Silesian Province, southern Poland)." J. Hydrol. (Amsterdam, Neth.) 635: 131191.
	This research aimed to assess the PPCP contamination of the water environment within the Silesian Province (southern Poland), where emerging contaminants are likely to occur due to urbanization and industrialization, especially in the central part of the voivodeship. An attempt was made to compare the PPCP occurrence in waters of areas that varied in land use and urban development, i.e. within the Upper Silesian Urban Area (USUA) and outside this region. The research was performed in selected areas of the province and involved sampling of raw and treated wastewater from four wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), as well as surface water (9 samples) and groundwater (14 samples) in six pilot sites. In total, 102 PPCPs were analyzed using the LC-MS/MS method. In the natural waters, physicochem. parameters were also measured, and the basic chem. composition of the samples was determined In the wastewater samples, the number of detected substances and the total PPCP concentrations were up to 66 PPCPs and 1211.0μg/L in influents, and up to 59 PPCPs and 174.1μg/L in effluents. The values for the natural water samples were resp. up to 71 PPCPs and 172.2μg/L in surface water, and up to 13 PPCPs and 1.5μg/L in groundwater. The results revealed that wastewater discharges from WWTPs using conventional treatment methods serve as a significant source of PPCPs due to inefficient removal of the microcontaminants. The contamination level of the surface waters in terms of the PPCP occurrence and basic chem. composition was higher within the USUA, where rivers are recipients of wastewater discharges from WWTPs. The PPCP quantity in the groundwater samples did not vary greatly within and outside the USUA, likely due to hydraulic connection between rivers and aquifers or induced surface water infiltration that recharge aquifers in some of the selected areas.

Slosarczyk, K., et al. (2025). "Monitoring pharmaceuticals and personal care products to assess water quality changes and pollution sources in a drinking water reservoir catchment." Water Resour. Ind. 33: 100283.
	This research aimed to identify sources of pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) in the Kozlowa Gora catchment, southern Poland, and assess their temporal and spatial variability. PPCP monitoring was conducted from 2020 to 2022. Samples were taken from the Brynica River and other streams. Groundwater and the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) were also sampled. The monitoring screened 109 PPCPs using the LC-MS/MS method. N,N-Diethyl-meta-toluamide (DEET), metformin, 1-H-benzotriazole, perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS), carbamazepine, and 4(5)-methyl-1-H-benzotriazole were the most frequently detected substances. The highest total PPCP concentrations in surface waters reached 30790 ng/L, with up to 53 compounds detected at one point. Results indicated temporal and spatial variability, with higher concentrations and more PPCPs during winter periods and increased contamination downstream from the WWTP. DEET was the only contaminant consistently found in the shallow aquifer discharged into the Brynica, however groundwater impact on the river ′s water quality is negligible. The study confirmed the WWTP as the primary source of PPCPs, with the number of detected substances in effluent samples amounting to 65 and their total concentrations reaching 148265 ng/L. Addnl. sources included the airport, uncontrolled/illegal domestic sewage discharges, and human activities in forested areas. This study was the first in Poland to implement a PPCP monitoring approach in a drinking water reservoir catchment area using multiple monitoring points and sampling campaigns. The results revealed the constant presence of PPCPs in a moderately urbanised catchment area, highlighting the importance of regular monitoring to understand PPCP migration in the environment.

Spoelstra, J., et al. (2020). "Septic systems contribute artificial sweeteners to streams through groundwater." Journal of Hydrology X 7.
	Artificial sweeteners are ubiquitous constituents of sanitary wastewater and are not completely attenuated by wastewater treatment processes. Consequently, artificial sweeteners are increasingly employed as a tool to detect wastewater and help evaluate its impact on aquatic environments. In rural areas, septic systems are known point sources of artificial sweeteners to groundwater, however the potential contribution of artificial sweeteners to streams via this pathway is unknown. We analyzed 294 samples from 173 stream sites in Southern Ontario, Canada, for acesulfame, saccharin, cyclamate, and sucralose, and found that 91% had one or more of these compounds present. The stream sites sampled did not have municipal wastewater treatment plants upstream and therefore septic system effluent was the most likely source of the artificial sweeteners. Acesulfame, which is the most recalcitrant of the four artificial sweeteners, was by far the most ubiquitous in streams, with a 91% detection frequency, compared to 27, 8, and 3% for saccharin, cyclamate, and sucralose, respectively. Stream concentrations ranged from non-detectable to maximum values of 225, 380, 204, and 291 ng/L for acesulfame, saccharin, cyclamate, and sucralose, respectively. We calculated that water from septic effluent contributed from < 0.005% to 0.5% of streamflow, with a median value of 0.052%. This is the first study to use artificial sweetener concentrations to quantify the fraction of septic effluent reaching streams via groundwater flow. Using acesulfame concentrations, we calculated that approximately 13% of the septic effluent water generated in rural Southern Ontario eventually ends up in local streams, however this is likely a conservative estimate. Although much of the septic effluent water that reaches streams may be free of all but the most persistent anthropogenic compounds, our study demonstrates that domestic wastewater must be considered as a possible source of stream contaminants, even if municipal wastewater is not a factor in the watershed.

Svabova, M., et al. (2025). "Evaluation of micropollutant removal from artificially recharged water using activated carbon." J. Hazard. Mater. 494: 138504.
	Pilot scale micropollutant removal onto three types of granular activated carbon was tested over a period of 25 mo. The columns were operated in a mode as similar as possible to the functioning of the main waterworks with the emphasis on minimizing the washing of the activated carbon layers. Sampling was performed monthly and a total of 222 micropollutants were evaluated. The columns were located at a waterworks in central Bohemia (Czech Republic). Real influent water from the river Jizera after artificial recharge and sand filtration was used. The aim of this study was to verify whether the process of micropollutant removal was suitable under the operating conditions at the waterworks. Clear seasonal patterns of micropollutant concentrations in the influent were detected. All three columns were able to effectively remove or substantially decrease the concentration of most micropollutants. The best performance was shown for the activated carbon Aquasorb 5005, which had the highest surface area and a well developed porous structure with the highest proportion of mesopores. The data were evaluated in order to identify micropollutant parameters important for their removal, and the pH-dependent octanol/water partition coefficient was identified as the key parameter. Other important parameters were charge and polar surface area of the micropollutant mols.

Takehara, C. T., et al. (2022). "A comprehensive database of declared high-intensity sweeteners in Brazilian commercial products and updated exposure assessment." Food Res Int 161: 111899.
	Government regulatory actions and public policies to reduce sugar consumption were recently implemented in Brazil. To evaluate their potential impact on the supply of products containing high-intensity sweeteners (HIS) and on dietary exposure to these substances, this study aimed to create a comprehensive database on HIS declared in Brazilian commercial products and estimate their intake through consumption of these products. The occurrence of HIS was evaluated through labeling information of 1869 commercial products available in the Brazilian market, collected between January 2021 and August 2021, and the daily intake was estimated for eight HIS (acesulfame K, advantame, aspartame, cyclamate, steviol glycosides, neotame, saccharin and sucralose) using a deterministic approach by multiplying the maximum permitted levels of HIS in foods and beverages by the consumption data of these products. The consumption data were obtained from the report of Household Budget Survey (POF/IBGE), conducted from 2017 to 2018 through a 24-hour dietary recall applied to 46,164 individuals aged 10 years and over, which included only average data (i.e. average consumption for the general population or subgroups). The most frequent HIS in the investigated products were sucralose (26.8 %; n = 938) and acesulfame K (21.7 %; n = 759), and although the combination of sweeteners is a common practice in the food industry, there was a predominance of only one substance in the investigated products (46.7 %; n = 873). The estimated intake of HIS for average consumers was below the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) and does not suggest a toxicological concern. A similar scenario was observed for high consumers, except for cyclamate and steviol glycosides, which corresponded to 144 % and 131 % of their respective ADIs in the general population. To our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive database on HIS in Brazil and the most recent exposure assessment performed nationally.

Takemine, S., et al. (2025). "Applicability of artificial sweeteners as markers of wastewater contamination in Japanese surface waters." Environ. Pollut. (Oxford, U. K.) 384: 127023.
	The stability and hydrophilicity of artificial sweeteners (ASs) potentially make them ideal markers for evaluating wastewater contamination in surface waters. In this study, a method for simultaneously measuring the concentrations of multiple ASs was developed. The method combined liquid chromatog.-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry with hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatog. and a basic mobile phase to realize the same detection limit for sucralose (SUC) as other ASs. The developed method was applied for measuring AS concentrations in water samples taken from rivers and wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) influents and effluents in Japan. SUC and acesulfame were detected in almost all river samples (>90%) as well as in the WWTP effluents and influents. The per capita SUC loadings in the WWTP samples were consistent with the estimated consumption, which implied that consumed SUC was discharged almost unaltered in surface waters. The SUC concentrations in the WWTP effluents and river samples showed a pos. correlation with the ratio of the watershed population or the population connected to WWTPs to water flow, which indicated that SUC was applicable as a quant. marker of wastewater contamination in Japanese surface waters.

