(1999). "Cyclamates." IARC Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum 73: 195-222.
	
(2006). Cyclamate. Bethesda (MD), National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
	Very little cyclamate enters breastmilk after maternal ingestion. However, some authors suggest that women may wish to limit the consumption of nonnutritive sweeteners while breastfeeding because their effect on the nursing infants are unknown.[1,2]

Adenaya, A., et al. (2024). "Vertical distribution and risk assessment of pharmaceuticals and other micropollutants in southern North Sea coastal waters." Mar. Pollut. Bull. 200: 116099.
	Pharmaceutical compounds are micropollutants of emerging concern, as well as other classes of chems. such as UV filters and artificial sweeteners. They enter marine environments via wastewater treatment plants, aquaculture runoff, hospital effluents, and shipping activities. While many studies have investigated the presence and distribution of these pollutants in numerous coastal areas, our study is the first to focus on their occurrence, spatial distribution, and vertical distribution in the sea surface microlayer (SML) and the near-surface layer of marine environments. We analyzed 62 pharmaceutical compounds, one UV filter, and six artificial sweeteners from the SML to the corresponding underlying water (0 cm, 20 cm, 50 cm, 100 cm, and 150 cm) at four stations in the southern North Sea. One station is the enclosed Jade Bay, one is the Weser estuary at Bremerhaven, and the other two stations (NS_7 and NS_8) are in the open German Bight. Jade Bay receives pollutants from surrounding wastewater treatment plants, while the Weser estuary receives pollutants from cities like Bremerhaven, which has dense populations and industrial activities. Concentrations of pharmaceutical compounds were higher in the upper water layers (from the SML to 20 cm). Eleven pharmaceutical compounds (caffeine, carbamazepine, gemfibrozil, ibuprofen, metoprolol, salicylic acid, clarithromycin, novobiocin, clindamycin, trimethoprim, and tylosin) were detected in >95% of our samples. One UV filter (benzophenone-4) was found in 83% and three artificial sweeteners (acesulfame, saccharin, and sucralose) in 100% of all our samples. All artificial sweeteners posed high risks to the freshwater invertebrate Daphnia magna. Understanding the spatial and vertical distribution of pharmaceuticals and other micropollutants in marine environments may be essential in assessing their dispersal and detection in other aquatic environments.

Agüero, S. D., et al. (2017). "Comparison of nonnutritive artificial sweetener consumption among university students in Latin American: Multicentric Study." Archivos Latinoamericanos De Nutricion 67(3): 178-186.
	The Objective this study is to compare the consumption of artificial sweeteners by sex and BMI status among university students in Peru, Chile, Guatemala and Panama. Survey of consumption of artificial sweeteners containing foods was designed and applied, adapted for each country with pictures of surveyed foods. After the survey application, a total of 1,229 participants male and female both university students from 4 different Latin American countries: Chile (n=473); Panama (n=300); Guatemala (n=253); Peru (n=204) were submitted to a anthropometry measeurement. Over 80% of students ate at least 1 food that contained artificial sweeteners, acesulphame-k, sucralose, and aspartame had the highest levels of consumption. Females in Chile and Guatemala ate the most sucralose (25.7 (6.6-50.9), p<0.05; 38.3 (15.1-82.5). Males in Panama ate the most acesulphame-k, (35.3 (11.5-91.5), p<0,05). Females had a positive correlation between artificial sweetener consumption and BMI for: acesulphame-k, aspartame and cyclamate. Males had a negative relationship between acesulphame-k, aspartame and BMI (p<0.05). We found a high consumption of artificial sweeteners among both male and female Latin American university students, with differences by country, sex and BMI status.

Ali, H. M., et al. (2025). "GC-MS and HPLC-FLD for sensitive assay of toxic cyclohexylamine in artificial sweetener tablets and human biological fluids." Food Chem Toxicol 201: 115447.
	Cyclohexylamine (CHA) is a precursor in the synthesis of artificial sweeteners cyclamate and its major metabolite. CHA is toxic to the nervous system, kidneys, and liver in animal studies. In the present work, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and high-performance liquid chromatography-fluorescence detection (HPLC-FLD) were introduced for the first time to the determination of nano-level concentration of CHA in artificial sweetener tablets and human biological fluids. According to the obtained results, HPLC-FLD and GC-MS of CHA exhibit a wide linear range from 1 to 1250 ng/mL and 5-1500 ng/mL within limits of detection of 0.49 and 1.55 ng/mL, respectively. Furthermore, both chromatographic techniques exhibited high accuracy and precision, yielding recovery estimates ranging from 95.85 % to 100.70 % for the HPLC-FLD method and 91.54 %-99.64 % for the other while the corresponding values of relative standard deviation (RSD%) range from 0.25 to 0.82 % and 1.25-3.97 %. The accuracies for HPLC-FLD and GC-MS method in serum and urine samples are within the range of 90.29-99.94 %. On the other hand, CHA was detected in all studied artificial sweetener tablets, its level ranged from 1.35 to 102.64 ng/tablet. Also, the results obtained from the HPLC-FLD and GC-MS methods were statistically compared, and no significant difference was found.

Alves Filho, E. G., et al. (2018). "Qualitative and quantitative control of pediatric syrups using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and chemometrics." J Pharm Biomed Anal 153: 29-36.
	Several flavoring and sweetening agents added to excipient of pediatric syrups are not declared in the package leaflet. Therefore, the aim of this study was to develop a non-target, simple, and precise method for qualitative and quantitative evaluation of pediatric syrups using NMR spectroscopy combined with chemometrics. This approach allowed the identification of several added compounds as citric acid, cyclamate, ethanol, glycerol, propylene glycol, saccharin, sorbitol, fructose, glucose, and sucrose. Among the sugared syrups, sucrose was the main carbohydrate with approximately 59.1%, and for sweetened syrups, glycerol with 25.5%. The ethanol was found with highest concentration of 4.0%, approximately. In addition, some syrups presented both sugar and sweetener, which is inconsistent according to the purpose of the addition. Consequently, institutional structures of countries as Brazil that are in charge of public health should put additional compliance pressure on pharmaceutical companies to clearly declare in package leaflet the presence and exact amount of the main compounds (at least) existent in the pediatric excipients.

Andreatta, M. M., et al. (2008). "Artificial sweetener consumption and urinary tract tumors in Cordoba, Argentina." Prev Med 47(1): 136-139.
	OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of the habitual use of the most common artificial sweeteners (AS) in the development of urinary tract tumors (UTT) in Argentina. METHODS: Case-control study of 197 patients with histologically confirmed UTT of transitional varieties, and 397 controls with acute, non-neoplastic, and non-urinary tract diseases, admitted to the same hospitals in Córdoba (Argentina) between 1999 and 2006. All subjects were interviewed about their use of AS and their exposure to other known or suspected risk factors for UTT. RESULTS: Fifty-one UTT patients (26%) and 87 controls (22%) used AS. The risk of UTT was significantly increased in long-term (> or =10 years) AS users compared with none-AS users. The OR (95% CI) for long-term consumers was 2.18 (1.22-3.89) and for short-term users was 1.10 (0.61-2.00) after adjustment for age, gender, BMI, social status. and years of tobacco use. CONCLUSION: Regular use of AS for 10 years or more was positively associated with UTT.

Arbeláez, P., et al. (2015). "Trace-level determination of sweeteners in sewage sludge using selective pressurized liquid extraction and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry." J Chromatogr A 1408: 15-21.
	The occurrence of sweeteners in the environment has become a matter of concern due to the possibility of adverse effects on human health and wildlife species. One of the routes by which sweeteners enter the environment is through sewage sludge. Therefore, a method was developed with a selective-pressurized liquid extraction (S-PLE) followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for the simultaneous determination of eight sweeteners in sewage sludge. The chromatographic separation was achieved in less than ten minutes using an amide polar-embedded reversed-phase column. Due to the high matrix effect present in the sample, an extensive study was conducted in order to overcome this issue, with C18 in-cell and solid-phase extraction (Oasis HLB) as a clean-up method. S-PLE/SPE recoveries at two levels of concentration (50μg/kg and 1000μg/kg in dry weight (d.w.), n=5) were higher than 61%. Repeatability and reproducibility at the same concentrations (%RSD, n=5) were lower than 11% and 16%, respectively. The limits of detection were 10μg/kg (d.w) for all compounds, except for cyclamate (5μg/kg (d.w.)). The method was successfully applied to sewage sludge samples from three sewage treatment plants located in Catalonia (Spain). Of the eight compounds, five were determined in all of the samples analysed, with acesulfame and saccharine being recorded at the highest concentrations of up to 481μg/kg and 591μg/kg (d.w.), respectively.

Arbeláez, P., et al. (2015). "Determination of high-intensity sweeteners in river water and wastewater by solid-phase extraction and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry." J Chromatogr A 1393: 106-114.
	High-intensity sweeteners have been suggested as potential organic contaminants due to their widespread use in food, drugs and sanitary products. As a consequence, they are introduced into the environment by different pathways, affecting aquatic life. In this study, a method based on solid-phase extraction (SPE) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) has been developed and validated for the determination of eight sweeteners (saccharin, cyclamate, aspartame, acesulfame, neohesperidin dihydrochalcone, sucralose, stevioside and glycyrrhizic acid) in river water and wastewater. To get the maximum recoveries in SPE, several commercial sorbents were tested and Oasis HLB gave the best results, with recoveries higher than 41% for all of the compounds in the different matrices. Method limits of detection were in the range of 0.001-0.04μg/L in river water and 0.01-0.5μg/L in influent and effluent wastewater. Method reproducibility between days (n=5) was below 15% for all compounds. The method was applied to the determination of sweeteners in various river waters and wastewaters in Catalonia. Cyclamate, aspartame, neohesperidin dihydrochalcone, acesulfame and sucralose were found in river water, with the two last compounds being present at the highest values (1.62μg/L for acesulfame and 3.57μg/L for sucralose). In influent and effluent wastewater, all of the compounds were found at concentration levels ranging from 0.05 to 155μg/L except for stevioside and neohesperidin dihydrochalcone, which were not detected.

Arianfar, A., et al. (2017). "Physical and chemical properties of high-potency sweeteners: a review." Chem. Res. J. 2(6): 70-78.
	A review. High-potency sweeteners are widely used in foods and beverages marketed as "sugar-free" or "diet," including baked goods, soft drinks, powd. drink mixes, candy, puddings, canned foods, jams and jellies, dairy products, and scores of other foods and beverages. In this review, phys. and chem. properties of some high- potency sweeteners are given in detail.

Arvaniti, O. S., et al. (2023). "Study on the Occurrence of Artificial Sweeteners, Parabens, and Other Emerging Contaminants in Hospital Wastewater Using LC-QToF-MS Target Screening Approach." Water 15(5).
	The presence of 220 emerging contaminants belonging to different classes (artificial sweeteners, personal care products, coffee and tobacco-related compounds, and industrial chemicals) was investigated in hospital wastewater for the first time. Twenty samples were collected within two sampling periods from two points of a Greek General Hospital. Target compounds were analyzed using a solid-phase extraction protocol followed by UHPLC-ESI-QToF-MS analysis. Analytical results showed that 23 micropollutants were detected at least once in hospital wastewater samples in Period 1, while 27 compounds were detected at least once in Period 2. The coffee and tobacco-related compounds were the most frequently detected substances, followed by artificial sweeteners, parabens, and industrial chemicals. The highest mean concentrations were recorded for the artificial sweeteners cyclamic acid (377 mu g/L) and saccharine (295 mu g/L), followed by caffeine (193 mu g/L), nicotine (162 mu g/L), and the industrial chemical lauryl diethanolamide (153 mu g/L). The group of artificial sweeteners contributed up to 55.1% (Point A/Period 1) to the total concentration of studied chemicals. The detection of high concentrations of artificial sweeteners in hospital effluents reveals that hospitals should be considered as important point-sources of these contaminants.

Asrar, S., et al. (2025). "Quercetin capped Au-Ag bimetallic nanoparticles for the detection of calcium dobesilate monohydrate in biological and environmental samples." J. Mol. Struct. 1334: 141808.
	The study details the synthesis of quercetin-capped Au-Ag bimetallic nanoparticles (Qct-AuAg BMNps) in an aqueous environment. UV visible spectra showed absorbance peak of gold and bimetallic nanoparticles at 524 nm and 403 nm, resp. The SEM anal. of Qct-AuAg BMNps showed an average particle size of 67.5 nm with good uniformity (PdI: 0.386). FTIR confirmed the presence of resp. functional groups in Qct-AuAg BMNps. The Qct-AuAg BMNps were used as a colorimetric sensor for detecting calcium dobesilate monohydrate (CDM) in aqueous solutions, showing a linear spectrophotometric relationship with CDM concentration ranging from 0.000001 mM to 10 mM (R2 = 0.9984). The detection and quantification limits were 1.66 x 10-6 and 2.71 x 10-5 mM, resp. The binding constant (Ka) was 9.8 x 104 M-1, with a 1:1 stoichiometry confirmed by Job's plot. The Qct-AuAg BMNps were successfully used to detect CDM in tap water and serum samples. The synthesis process was optimized using Box Behnken Design, with the optimal conditions found at 50°C, 2 mM quercetin, and a 5:1 silver-to-gold ratio. Therefore, the synthesized quercetin capped gold silver bimetallic nanoparticles were proved effective for the detection of CDM in liquid samples.

Ayyavu, S., et al. (2025). "Detection of Non-caloric artificial sweetener saccharine in soft drinks and ice-creams through intermolecular H-bonding by using AuNPs-based fluorescent probe." Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology a-Chemistry 459.
	Artificial sweeteners (ASs) are widely utilized as sugar substitutes in food products. However, excessive consumption of ASs poses potential health risks, necessitating their early detection. In this study, pamoic acid (PA)-functionalized gold nanoparticles (PA@AuNPs) were employed for the detection of ASs using fluorescence spectroscopy. The PA@AuNPs exhibited high selectivity and excellent sensitivity towards saccharine (SAC) (LoD (limit of detection) = 0.14 x 10(-6) M and LoQ (limit of quantification) = 0.47 x 10(-6) M), compared to other commercially available ASs. The fluorescence emission intensity of PA@AuNPs was significantly quenched (similar to 3-fold) upon the addition of SAC (0 -> 50 x 10(-6) M) through the formation of a ground state complex, PA@AuNPs center dot SAC. This complex formation was corroborated by FTIR analysis. The non-radiative process validated by time-resolved fluorescence analysis. Morphological analysis revealed that the spherical morphology of PA@AuNPs remained unchanged upon SAC interaction. PA@AuNPs effectively detected SAC in soft drinks and ice creams, with recovery ranges from 121 % to 105 %.

Baumann, M. and K. Näf (2024). "Quantification of Nitrite in Excipients and Chemicals: A Versatile and Highly Sensitive Method Using Headspace Gas Chromatography Coupled to Mass Spectrometry." Organic Process Research & Development 28(8): 3217-3228.
	The trace level quantification of nitrite in excipients and chemicals is of major interest to the pharmaceutical industry due to the formation of carcinogenic nitrosamines from potentially present secondary amines and nitrite in the API and/or drug product. The aim of this work was the development of a method for the quantification of nitrite down to a level of 0.05 mg nitrite per kg material (ppm) that can be versatilely used for a wide range of excipients and chemicals. The detection of cyclohexene from the reaction of cyclamate with nitrite in water by gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry was selected due to its presumed great potential in terms of sensitivity, robustness, reliability, and specificity. The root cause for the presence of a significant blank peak, which was the key limiting factor, was identified and eliminated to achieve the desired sensitivity. Consequently, a method for the quantification of nitrite down to the targeted level of 0.05 ppm was developed and validated for 19 different excipients and chemicals. Specific sample preparation for challenging excipients and chemicals, such as magnesium stearate and carbonates, was developed and successfully applied. It was shown that the quantification range can be expanded up to 50 ppm covering a wide concentration range.

Been, F., et al. (2021). "Risk-based prioritization of suspects detected in riverine water using complementary chromatographic techniques." Water Res. 204: 117612.
	Surface waters are widely used as drinking water sources and hence their quality needs to be continuously monitored. However, current routine monitoring programs are not comprehensive as they generally cover only a limited number of known pollutants and emerging contaminants. This study presents a risk-based approach combining suspect and non-target screening (NTS) to help extend the coverage of current monitoring schemes. In particular, the coverage of NTS was widened by combining three complementary separations modes: Reverse phase (RP), Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatog. (HILIC) and Mixed-mode chromatog. (MMC). Suspect lists used were compiled from databases of relevant substances of very high concern (e.g., SVHCs) and the concentration of detected suspects was evaluated based on ionization efficiency prediction. Results show that suspect candidates can be prioritized based on their potential risk (i.e., hazard and exposure) by combining ionization efficiency-based concentration estimation, in vitro toxicity data or, if not available, structural alerts and QSAR.based toxicity predictions. The acquired information shows that NTS analyses have the potential to complement target analyses, allowing to update and adapt current monitoring programs, ultimately leading to improved monitoring of drinking water sources.

Behrens, M., et al. (2018). "The non-caloric sweeteners cyclamate and saccharin exhibit mutual suppression of bitter taste receptors responsible for their bitter off-taste." Chemical Senses 43(3): E19-E19.
	
Ben Nasr, W., et al. (2024). "Emerging organic compounds as markers of degradation of groundwater qualitative and quantitative equilibrium in a context of rapid urban expansion." Sci. Total Environ. 915: 170068.
	With the neo-metamorphosis of the residential landscape worldwide and sluggish sanitation strategies in urban environments, rudimentary on-site sanitation systems remain commonly used, especially in developing countries, despite the risks of groundwater contamination. The effective management of such water resources relies on assessment of the sensitivity of anthropized aquifers to man-made impact, including groundwater behavioral alteration, in terms of both quality and quantity. Associated with tracking of changes in land use, this study proposes an approach involving emerging organic contaminants (EOCs) as indicators of the alteration of groundwater balance due the exposure of shallow aquifers to the risks of infiltration of untreated wastewater from soak pits. This methodol. was applied to the shallow aquifer beneath the urban agglomeration of Grand-Sfax (Tunisia). Combined with an updated follow-up of groundwater piezometric fluctuations in relation with inputs from surface contamination sources, the spatialisation of contamination levels by EOCs provided a clear delineation of the most impacted aquifer zones. This approach revealed a significant link between the continuous rise in piezometric levels by contributions from untreated inputs and the accumulation of high levels of contamination in groundwater. The understanding of EOC underground pathways allowed the determination of the fates and processes responsible for the diffusion of contamination throughout the studied aquifer. The ability of groundwater to reflect population life style and the use patterns of such organic mols. was also assessed. Besides revealing the legacy of persistent contamination, this approach involving EOCs as tracers with different levels of persistence provided a spatial observation of the aquifer exposure to continuous contamination processes. This approach made it possible to develop a conceptual presentation of aquifer vulnerability to urban pressures and to predict the effects of subsequent expansion of unplanned urbanisation on groundwater quality.

Beretsou, V. G., et al. (2022). "Multiclass target analysis of contaminants of emerging concern including transformation products, soil bioavailability assessment and retrospective screening as tools to evaluate risks associated with reclaimed water reuse." Sci. Total Environ. 852: 158391.
	The occurrence of 200 multiclass contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) encompassing 168 medicinal products and transformation products (TPs), 5 artificial sweeteners, 12 industrial chems., and 15 other compounds was investigated in influent and effluent wastewater samples collected during 7 consecutive days from 5 wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) located in Cyprus. The methodol. included a generic solid-phase extraction protocol using mixed-bed cartridges followed by Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatog. coupled with Quadrupole-Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (UHPLC-QTOF-MS) anal. A total of 63 CECs were detected at least in one sample, with 52 and 55 out of the 200 compounds detected in influents and effluents, resp. Ten (10) out of the 24 families of parent compounds and associated TPs were found in the wastewater samples (influent or effluent).1-H-benzotriazole, carbamazepine, citalopram, lamotrigine, sucralose, tramadol, and venlafaxine (>80% frequency of appearance in effluents) were assessed with respect to their bioavailability in soil as part of different scenarios of irrigation with reclaimed water following a qual. approach. A high score of 12 (high probability) was predicted for 2 scenarios, a low score of 3 (rare occasions) for 2 scenarios, while the rest 28 scenarios had scores 5-8 (unlikely or limited possibility) and 9-11 (possibly). Retrospective screening was performed with the use of a target database of 2466 compounds and led to the detection of 158 addnl. compounds (medicinal products (65), medicinal products TPs (15), illicit drugs (7), illicit drugs TPs (3), industrial chems. (11), plant protection products (25), plant protection products TPs (10), and various other compounds (22). This work aspires to showcase how the presence of CECs in wastewater could be investigated and assessed at WWTP level, including an expert-based methodol. for assessing the soil bioavailability of CECs, with the aim to develop sustainable practices and enhance reclaimed water reuse.

Buso, M. E., et al. (2024). "Relative validity of habitual sugar and low/no-calorie sweetener consumption assessed by food frequency questionnaire, multiple 24-h dietary recalls and urinary biomarkers: an observational study within the SWEET project." Am J Clin Nutr 119(2): 546-559.
	BACKGROUND: Studies investigating associations between sweeteners and health yield inconsistent results, possibly due to subjective self-report dietary assessment methods. OBJECTIVES: We compared the performance of a food frequency questionnaire (FFQ), multiple 24-h dietary recalls (24hRs), and urinary biomarkers to estimate intake of sugars and low/no-calorie sweeteners (LNCSs). METHODS: Participants (n = 848, age 54 ± 12 y) from a 2-y observational study completed 1 semiquantitative FFQ and ≥ 3 nonconsecutive 24hRs. Both methods assessed intake of sugars (mono- and disaccharides, sucrose, fructose, free and added sugars) and sweetened foods and beverages (sugary foods, fruit juice, and sugar or LNCS-containing beverages [sugar-sweetened beverages and low/no-calorie sweetened beverages (LNCSBs)]); 24hRs also included LNCS-containing foods and tabletop sweeteners (low/no-calorie sweetened foods [LNCSFs]). Urinary excretion of sugars (fructose+sucrose) and LNCSs (acesulfame K+sucralose+steviol glucuronide+cyclamate+saccharin) were simultaneously assessed using ultrapressure liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry in 288 participants with 3 annual 24-h urine samples. Methods were compared using, amongst others, validity coefficients (correlations corrected for measurement error). RESULTS: Median (interquartile range) FFQ intakes ranged from 0 (0-7) g/d for LNCSBs to 94 (73-117) g/d for mono- and disaccharides. LNCSB use was reported by 32% of participants. Median LNCSB+LNCSF intake using 24hRs was 1 (0-50) g/d and reported by 58%. Total sugar excretions were detected in 100% of samples [56 (37-85) mg/d] and LNCSs in 99% of urine samples [3 (1-10) mg/d]. Comparing FFQ against 24hRs showed VCs ranging from 0.38 (fruit juice) to 0.74 (LNCSB). VCs for comparing FFQ with urinary excretions were 0.25 to 0.29 for sugars and 0.39 for LNCSBs; for 24hR they amounted to 0.31-0.38 for sugars, 0.37 for LNCSBs, and 0.45 for LNCSFs. CONCLUSIONS: The validity of the FFQ against 24hRs for the assessment of sugars and LNCSBs ranged from moderate to good. Comparing self-reports and urine excretions showed moderate agreement but highlighted an important underestimation of LNCS exposure using self-reports.

Campos, P., et al. (2024). "Association between consumption of non-nutritive sweeteners and gestational diabetes mellitus in Chilean pregnant women: A secondary data analysis of the CHiMINCs-II cohort." Nutrition (N. Y., NY, U. S.) 128: 112560.
	To evaluate the association between consumed non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) in a cohort of pregnant women from Santiago, Chile. This secondary data anal. of a cohort.involved 1,472 pregnant women from the Chilean Maternal-Infant Cohort Study-II (CHiMINCs-II). These women received care at primary health care centers in Puente Alto county, South-Eastern Metropolitan Health Service of Santiago, Chile. NNS consumption was estimated using 24-h dietary recalls and linked to the packaged foods nutrition facts panel. Plasma glucose values were extracted from clin. records. GDM was defined according to national criteria: 1) fasting plasma glucose (FPG) ≥100 and <126 mg/dL at the first antenatal visit; 2) FPG ≥100 mg/dL or 2-h plasma glucose ≥140 mg/dL in the 75 g oral glucose tolerance test at 24-28 wk. Cases with a GDM diagnosis in their medical records were also considered regardless of test results. The association between each NNS and GDM was assessed using logistic regression models.A total of 77.8% of the participants consumed NNS. The most consumed was sucralose (66%), followed by acesulfame-K (43.6%), and steviol glycosides (41.1%). Beverages (82%), dairy (12.4%) and candy products (4.4%) were the primary dietary sources of NNS. The GDM incidence was 18.9%, higher among consumers of any NNS compared to non-consumers (20.3% vs. 14.2%, p < 0.05). The adjusted model showed a significant association between the consumption of any NNS and sucralose and the risk of GDM (OR for any NNS = 1.58; 95% CI: 1.10-2.26; P = 0.014; OR sucralose = 1.44; 95% CI 1.06-1.95; P = 0.020). The consumption of NNS, particularly sucralose, is associated with an increased risk of GDM in pregnant women. Further studies are essential to validate these results in other contexts and to guide future recommendations for healthier dietary practices among pregnant populations.

Cárdenas-Soracá, D. M., et al. (2025). "Development and validation of a retracted thin film solid phase microextraction device for time weighted average monitoring of artificial sweeteners concentration in surface waters." Green Analytical Chemistry 13.
	A retracted thin-film solid phase microextraction device was used as a passive sampler to monitor the time-weighted average concentration of artificial sweeteners (AS) in Grand River, Ontario, Canada. Laboratory and field calibration were performed to determine differences in the estimated sampling rate values. Laboratory sampling rates ranged from 0.0033 mL day(-1) for neohesperidin dihydrochalcone to 0.0075 mL day(-1) for saccharin. Sampler devices were deployed for 30 days downstream of a municipal wastewater treatment plant in the Grand River, Ontario, Canada. Linear accumulation for four AS was observed (R-2>0.9363) in the sampling devices over 30 days, and in-situ sampling rates were between 0.0045 +/- 0.0002 for sucralose and 0.0070 +/- 0.0009 mL day(-1) for acesulfame. The estimated sampling rates for the river and laboratory exhibited <20 % deviation from the theoretical values. Simultaneously, water samples from the Grand River were collected to determine the concentration levels of artificial sweeteners. The concentration of acesulfame, saccharin, cyclamate, aspartame, and sucralose in the Grand River ranged from 0.13 to 26.5 ng mL(-1). The validation results indicated that this device is suitable for long-term monitoring of AS in surface waters.

Carles, L., et al. (2022). "Wastewater microorganisms impact microbial diversity and important ecological functions of stream periphyton." Water Res. 225: 119119.
	Effluents of wastewater treatment plants can impact microbial communities in the receiving streams. However, little is known about the role of microorganisms in wastewater as opposed to other wastewater constituents, such as nutrients and micropollutants. We aimed therefore at determining the impact of wastewater microorganisms on the microbial diversity and function of periphyton, key microbial communities in streams. We used a flow-through channel system to grow periphyton upon exposure to a mixture of stream water and unfiltered or ultra-filtered wastewater. Impacts were assessed on periphyton biomass, activities and tolerance to micropollutants, as well as on microbial diversity. Our results showed that wastewater microorganisms colonized periphyton and modified its community composition, resulting for instance in an increased abundance of Chloroflexi and a decreased abundance of diatoms and green algae. This led to shifts towards heterotrophy, as suggested by the changes in nutrient stoichiometry and the increased mineralization potential of carbon substrates. An increased tolerance towards micropollutants was only found for periphyton exposed to unfiltered wastewater but not to ultra-filtered wastewater, suggesting that wastewater microorganisms were responsible for this increased tolerance. Overall, our results highlight the need to consider the role of wastewater microorganisms when studying potential impacts of wastewater on the receiving water body.

Carloni, J., et al. (2003). "Potentiometric determination of saccharin in commercial artificial sweeteners using a silver electrode." Food Chemistry 83(2): 297-301.
	A simple, precise, rapid and low-cost potentiometric method for saccharin determination in commercial artificial sweeteners is proposed. Saccharin present in several samples of artificial sweeteners is potentiometrically titrated with silver nitrate solution using a silver wire as the indicator electrode, coupled to a titroprocessor. The best pH range was from 3.0 to 3.5 and the detection limit of sodium saccharin was 2.5 mg/ml. Substances normally found along with saccharin in several commercial artificial sweeteners such as maltodextrin, glucose, sucrose, fructose, aspartame, cyclamate, caffeine, sorbitol, lactose, nitrate, methyl- and n-propyl-p-hydroxybenzoate, benzoic, citric and ascorbic acids do not interfere even in significant amounts (e.g. 20 excess relative to saccharin). Chloride ion interferes when present in concentrations larger than 10 mg l(-1); this interference is eliminated with previous extraction of the sweetener from the aqueous medium with ethyl acetate. The results obtained by applying the proposed method compared very favorably with those given by the HPLC method recommended by the FDA. (C) 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Carrizo, J. C., et al. (2022). "Suspect screening of pharmaceuticals, illicit drugs, pesticides, and other emerging contaminants in Argentinean Piaractus mesopotamicus, a fish species used for local consumption and export." Chemosphere 309(Pt 1): 136769.
	The widespread distribution of contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) is a major concern due to their potential effects on human health and the environment. The insufficient sewage treatment plant infrastructures is a global problem most accentuated in less developed countries and results in the discharge of CECs to water bodies. Pacu (Piaractus mesopotamicus) is a ray-finned freshwater fish species native to the Paraná basin. It is also the most produced aquaculture fish species in Argentina since 2012. Though uninvestigated to date, the occurrence of CECs in pacu may be of high relevance due to production volumes and relevance to human exposure through fish consumption. In this study, we applied a high-resolution mass spectrometry screening method to qualitatively analyze over 100 CECs in pacu. Four extraction/cleanup methods were tested on pooled pacu fillet, including solid-phase extraction and QuEChERS. The method that produced the highest number of detections was selected for further analysis of pacu purchased in supermarkets and fish markets in Argentina between 2017 and 2020. Residues of pesticides, antibiotics, pharmaceuticals, personal care products, plasticizers, sweeteners, drug metabolites, stimulants, and illegal drugs were detected in the samples. A total of 38 CECs were detected, ranging between 24 and 35 CECs per individual sample. 100% of the samples had positive detections of caffeine, 1,7-dimethylxanthine, xanthine, benzoylecgonine, methylparaben, ethylparaben, bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), metolachlor, carbendazim, salicylic acid, 2,4-D, saccharin, cyclamate, and dodecanedioic acid. Mappings generated with correspondence analysis were used to explore similarities/dissimilarities among the detected compounds. To our knowledge this is the first report of saccharin, cyclamate, 2,4 - D, carbendazim, metolachlor, ethylparaben, propylparben, bisphenol A, DEHP, and benzotriazole in fish from Argentina, and the first report on the presence of lisinopril, metropolol acid and dodecanedioic acid in fish worldwide.

Chen, F., et al. (2024). "Effect of Lactiplantibacillus plantarum CCFM8661 on serum metabolites and gut microbiota in a lead-exposed population." Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 261(Part_2): 129815.
	In this study, we investigated the impact of Lactiplantibacillus plantarum (L. plantarum) CCFM8661 on the gut microbiota, and the serum and fecal metabolomes in lead (Pb)-exposed individuals. The volunteers recruited for this study were divided into two treatment groups, (i) the placebo (control) and (ii) the L. plantarum CCFM8661 treatment groups. The anal. revealed that probiotic intervention reversed some of the changes in Pb exposure-induced intestinal bacterial abundance, including the abundance of Parabacteroides, Bacteroides, Clostridiaceae, and Erysipelotrichaceae. An anal. of the fecal metabolome identified 26 differential metabolites involved in purine metabolism, unsaturated fatty acid metabolism, and other pathways. Serum metabolite anal. showed that L. plantarum CCFM8661 treatment altered the serum metabolite levels of various metabolic pathways, such as the glycerophospholipid, amino acid, and glutathione metabolism pathways. These results suggest that L. plantarum CCFM8661 may have beneficial effects on Pb-exposed populations by modulating the gut microbiota, host serum metabolism, and the metabolism of the gut microbiota.

Cheng, F. Cyclamate, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
	A review. This article discuss about in vivo metabolism of cyclohexylsulfamic acid (cyclamate) which is used as a low-calorie sweetener, as a catalyst in the production of paints and plastics.

Cheng, F., et al. (2023). "Text Mining-Based Suspect Screening for Aquatic Risk Assessment in the Big Data Era: Event-Driven Taxonomy Links Chemical Exposures and Hazards." Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 10(11): 1004-1010.
	To improve the accuracy of mixture risk assessment, researchers are employing suspect anal. with expanded lists of contaminants in addition to conventional target lists. However, there are some inherent challenges for these instrument-based analyses, including subjective selection of suspect contaminants, no information for chem. bioactivity, requirements for costly verification, and limited regional coverage. As a supplementary approach, we propose a data-driven suspect screening and risk assessment method informed by mining big data from high-throughput screening bioassay platforms and the refereed literature. The Pearl River Delta (PRD) with main event drivers of arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and oxidative stress (ARE) response was examined Bioactivity concentrations were collected from the CompTox Chems. Dashboard, which contained more than 900 000 substances. In addition, exposure metadata from 24 986 literature entries for the environmental occurrence and distribution of contaminants in the PRD over the past three decades were mined. Collectively, a regional distribution map of aquatic hazards induced by AhR- and ARE-active compounds was generated, indicating gradients of low to moderate risks. This study specifically reports a novel big data approach for addressing the increasingly common challenge of objectively selecting analytes during suspect screening, which was recently identified as an urgent research question to advance more sustainable environmental quality.

Cheng, S., et al. (2024). "Simultaneous analysis of natural and artificial sweeteners in sugar-free drinks and urine samples by column-switching UHPLC-charged aerosol detection method." J Chromatogr A 1713: 464533.
	Sweeteners are considered an alternative to high-calorie foods or drinks and have been widely used globally. However, the simultaneous separation and detection of high-polarity natural and artificial sweeteners are challenging owing to their broad-spectrum physical and chemical properties. Herein, we developed a column-switching UHPLCCAD method and used it for detecting and quantitating 12 sweeteners, including natural sweeteners (erythritol, mannitol, xylitol, sorbitol and stevioside) and artificial sweeteners (acesulfame potassium, saccharin sodium salt, sodium cyclamate, sucralose, aspartame, alitame and neotame). The LOD and LOQ were 0.932-6.25 μg/mL and 3.10-20.83 μg/mL, respectively, and the method demonstrated excellent linearity (R² ≥ 0.9990), good precision (intraday and interday precision was 0.59-6.88 %), and high recovery (average recoveries were 85.16-108.64 %). This method was applied to determine the sweeteners in 15 sugar-free drinks purchased from the local Chinese supermarkets. What's more, natural sweetener erythritol and artificial sweetener acesulfame potassium were suspected over addition in sugar-free drinks. Meanwhile the method was applied to the sweeteners in various sugar-free drinks and the dynamic monitoring of transit and excretion in vivo after drinking. Those prove that the method can be used to the detection of sugar free drinks and quality control of the sweeteners. The study highlights the potential of UHPLC-charged aerosol detection technology in detection of multiple components in food industry.

Diepeveen-de Bruin, M., et al. (2023). "Development and validation of a UPLC-MS/MS method for the quantification of sugars and non-nutritive sweeteners in human urine." J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 1225: 123741.
	High-intensity sweeteners ('sweeteners'), such as sucralose, saccharine, acesulfame, cyclamate and steviol, are replacing sugars in many food products, but biomarker-based data on their population-wide exposure, as well as analytical methods that can quantify urinary concentrations of sugars and sweeteners simultaneously, are lacking. Here, we developed and validated an ultra-pressure liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) method to quantify glucose, sucrose, fructose, sucralose, saccharine, acesulfame, cyclamate and steviol glucuronide in human urine. Urine samples were prepared by a simple dilution step containing the internal standards in water and methanol. Separation was achieved on a Shodex Asahipak NH2P-40 hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) column using gradient elution. The analytes were detected using electrospray ionization in negative ion mode, and selective reaction monitoring was optimized using the [M-H]- ions. Calibration curves ranged between 34 and 19,230 ng/mL for glucose and fructose, and 1.8 to 1,026 ng/mL for sucrose and the sweeteners. The method has acceptable accuracy and precision, which depends on the application of appropriate internal standards. Storage of urine samples in lithium monophosphate gives the best overall analytical performance, and storage at room temperature without any preservatives should be avoided since this leads to reduced glucose and fructose concentrations. With the exception of fructose, all analytes were stable throughout 3 freeze-thaw cycles. The validated method was applied to human urine samples, demonstrating quantifiable concentrations of the analytes which were in the expected range. It is concluded that the method has acceptable performance to quantitatively determine dietary sugars and sweeteners in human urine.

Dimzon, I. K. D., et al. (2018). "Trace organic chemical pollutants from the lake waters of San Pablo City, Philippines by targeted and non-targeted analysis." Sci Total Environ 639: 588-595.
	More than half of the freshwater lakes in the Philippines are small with surface areas of <2 km(2). The dynamics in these lakes are different from those in the bigger lakes. This study was conducted to determine the organic pollutants and their sources in three of the seven lakes of San Pablo City in Laguna, Philippines: lakes Palakpakin, Sampaloc, and Pandin. Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) and Liquid Chromatography - Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were used in the targeted and non-targeted analysis of the lake water samples. The three lakes are all volcanic crater lakes but are exposed to different anthropogenic activities, which includes domestic activities, livelihood (farming and aquaculture) and eco-tourism. Due to the presence of rice fields and fruit plantations, chlorpyrifos was detected in the three lakes while other pesticides like cypermethrin, picolinafen and quinoxyfen were additionally found in Lake Sampaloc, which is the biggest of the three lakes and located within the urbanized section of the city. Traces of different surfactants (linear alkylbenzene sulfonates, secondary alkyl sulfonates, alkyl sulfates, alkyl ether sulfates), biocide benzalkonium chloride, insect repellent diethyltoluamide, antibiotics (sulfadiazine and sulfamethoxazole), hypertension drug telmisartan, phosphate-based fire retardants, and artificial sweeteners (acesulfame, cyclamate, saccharin and sucralose) were detected in lakes Sampaloc and Palakpakin. The same surfactants, artificial sweeteners, insect repellant and phosphate-based fire retardants were also found in Lake Pandin, which is mainly used for eco-tourism activities like swimming and boating. The results of this study suggest that the organic pollutants present in the small lakes can be linked to the various human activities in the immediate lake environment. Because small lakes are more prone to environmental stresses, human activities in the said lakes must be regulated to ensure sustainable development.

Djieugoue, B., et al. (2024). "Emerging organic compounds in surface and groundwater reflect the urban dynamics in sub-Saharan cities." Sci. Total Environ. 956: 177217.
	Rapid and uncontrolled urbanization in sub-Saharan Africa has led to an increased production and expansion of synthetic chems., resulting in significant pollution of the aquatic environments, particularly by Emerging Organic Contaminants (EOCs). Due to the low income of the population in this region, there is often a lack of control over water and fishery resources prior to consumption. Therefore, the current study aims to use EOCs as markers of water resource quality degradation, and to assess the potential environmental risk of these compounds on some aquatic organisms. Among 120 targeted compounds, 66 were detected at 22 sites in Douala city, Cameroon, including 9 rivers and 13 groundwater samples. The detected EOCs were classified into three categories, including pharmaceuticals and personal care products (n = 55), lifestyle compounds (n = 7) and industrial compounds (n = 4). Surface water was highly impacted, with EOC total concentrations reaching 61,273 ng/L, vs. 16,677 ng/L in groundwater. Contamination levels and the type of contaminants were closely linked to land use patterns in the study area. Contamination was mainly attributed to domestic, hospital and brewery's industry wastewaters, landfill and pit latrines. Consumption patterns and physicochem. properties of compounds, in particular their persistence, polarity and octanol/water gradient (Kow), explain their occurrence at high concentrations (up to μg/L) in groundwater. According to Risk Quotient (RQ) with a maximum of 93.4 in surface water and 8.5 in groundwater, about 1/3 of the identified compounds pose a serious threat to aquatic organisms, including algae, invertebrates and fish. For the first time in Central African, we revealed these high levels of water contamination by EOCs and identified the risk for the environmental health. Our study demonstrates the urgency to adopt sustainable water management strategies in large cities of the region.

Dubber, D., et al. (2024). "The use of sterol profiles, supported with other faecal source tracking methods, to apportion septic tanks contamination in rural catchments." Environ Pollut 341: 122884.
	Identifying the origin of faecal pollution in water is needed for effective water management decisions to protect both human health and aquatic ecosystems. Traditionally used indicators of faecal contamination, such as E. coli, only indicate pollution from warm-blooded animals and not the specific source of contamination; hence, more source specific tracers are required. The study has focussed on separating the two main sources of contaminants within rural catchments in Ireland, agriculture and on-site wastewater treatment systems (predominantly septic tanks). While human-specific effluent tracers may assist in identifying potential pathways from individual septic tanks to surface waters, it is difficult to quantify the cumulative impact of such systems at a catchment scale. This study has investigated faecal sterols as a method to quantify such an impact on four small catchments in areas of low subsoil permeability with high densities of septic tanks. The results demonstrate the usefulness of faecal sterols which provide a quantitative evaluation of the respective impact between agricultural pasture inputs and on-site effluent showing differences between the four catchments. The study also highlights the need to derive more specific local reference sterol profile databases for specific countries or regions, using local source material of animal faeces and effluent. Two intensive sampling campaigns on the four catchments then used faecal sterols in parallel to fluorescent whitening compounds (FWCs), caffeine, artificial sweeteners and selected pharmaceuticals to gain further insights and confirmation about contamination hotspots as well as providing comparison between the different parameters. The combination of sterols, FWCs, caffeine, acesulfame and cyclamate has proven suitable to provide an estimate of the extent of human contamination in these rural catchments and has yielded additional information about potential pollution pathways and proximity of contamination. Overall, this methodology can help to facilitate a targeted and effective water management in such catchments.

Fatibello-Filho, O., et al. (1999). "Solid-phase reactor with copper(II) phosphate for flow-injection spectrophotometric determination of aspartame in tabletop sweeteners." Analytica Chimica Acta 384(2): 167-174.
	A flow-injection spectrophotometric method was developed for determining aspartame in tabletop sweeteners. Samples were dissolved in water and 250 mu l of the solution were injected into a carrier stream of 5.0 x 10(-3) mol l(-1) sodium berate solution (pH 9.0). The sample flowed through a column (13 cm x 2.0 mm) packed with Cu-3(PO4)(2) immobilized in a matrix of polyester resin and Cu(II) ions were released from the solid-phase reactor by the formation of Cu(II)(aspartame)(2) complex. The mixture merged with a stream of berate buffer solution (pH 9.0) containing 0.02% (w/w) alizarin red S and the Cu(II)-alizarin red complex formed was measured spectrophotometrically at 550 nm. The calibration graph for aspartame was linear in the 20-80 mu g ml(-1) concentration range, with a detection limit of 2 mu g ml(-1) of aspartame. The RSD was 0.2% for a solution containing 40 mu g ml(-1) aspartame (n = 10) and 70 measurements were obtained per hour. The column was stable for at least 8h of continuous use (500 injections) at 25 degrees C. The proposed method was applied for determining aspartame in seven commercial tabletop sweeteners without interference of saccharin, acesulfame-k and cyclamate. (C) 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

Feng, K. Q., et al. (2022). "Cloning and characterization of four enzymes responsible for cyclohexylamine degradation from Paenarthrobacter sp. TYUT067." Protein Expression and Purification 198.
	Paenarthrobacter sp. TYUT067 is a soil bacterium that can degrade and use cyclohexylamine as the sole source of carbon and energy. However, the responsible enzymes involved in cyclohexylamine degradation by TYUT067 have not been cloned and characterized in detail yet. In this study, four possible cyclohexylamine degradation genes, one cyclohexylamine oxidase (Pachao), two cyclohexanone monooxygenases (Pachms) and one lactone hydrolase (Pamlh) were successfully cloned and heterologous expressed in Escherichia coli T7 host cells. The four enzymes were purified and characterized. The optimal pH and temperature of the purified enzymes toward their own substrates were 7.0 (PaCHAO), 8.0 (PaCHM1), 9.0 (PaCHM2 and PaMLH) and 30 degrees C (PaCHAO and PaMLH), 40 degrees C (PaCHM2) and 45 degrees C (PaCHM1), respectively, with KM of 1.1 mM (PaCHAO), 0.1 mM (PaCHM1), 0.1 mM (PaCHM2) and 0.8 mM (PaMLH), and yielding a catalytic efficiency kcat/KM of 16.1 mM- 1 s-1 (PaCHAO), 1.0 mM-1 s-1 (PaCHM1), 5.0 mM-1 s-1 (PaCHM2) and 124.4 mM-1 s-1 (PaMLH). In vitro mimicking the cyclohexylamine degradation pathway was conducted by using the combined three cyclohexylamine degradation enzymes (PaCHAO, PaCHM2 and PaMLH) with 10-50 mM cyclohexylamine, 100% conversion of cyclohexylamine could be finished within 12 h without any detected intermediates. The current study confirmed the enzymes responsible for cyclohexylamine degradation in TYUT067 for the first time, provide basic information for further investigation and application of these specific enzymes in pollution control.

Ferrer, I. and E. M. Thurman (2010). "Analysis of sucralose and other sweeteners in water and beverage samples by liquid chromatography/time-of-flight mass spectrometry." Journal of Chromatography A 1217(25): 4127-4134.
	A methodology for the chromatographic separation and analysis of three of the most popular artificial sweeteners (aspartame, saccharin, and sucralose) in water and beverage samples was developed using liquid chromatography/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LC/TOF-MS). The sweeteners were extracted from water samples using solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges. Furthermore, several beverages were analyzed by a rapid and simple method without SPE, and the presence of the sweeteners was confirmed by accurate mass measurements below 2-ppm error. The unambiguous confirmation of the compounds was based on accurate mass measurements of the protonated molecules [M+H](+), their sodium adducts and their main fragment ions. Quantitation was carried out using matrix-matched standard calibration and linearity of response over 2 orders of magnitude was demonstrated (r > 0.99). A detailed fragmentation study for sucralose was carried out by time-of-flight and a characteristic spectrum fingerprint pattern was obtained for the presence of this compound in water samples. Finally, the analysis of several wastewater, surface water and groundwater samples from the US showed that sucralose can be found in the aquatic environment at concentrations up to 2.4 mu g/L, thus providing a good indication of wastewater input from beverage sources. (C) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Finassi, C. M., et al. (2023). "Effect of sweetened beverages intake on salivary aspartame, insulin and alpha-amylase levels: A single-blind study." Food Res Int 173(Pt 2): 113406.
	The objective was to assess aspartame excretion in saliva and the salivary insulin, total protein (TP), and alpha-amylase (AMI) levels in response to the ingestion of sweetened beverages (sodium cyclamate, aspartame, acesulfame, and sucrose). Fifteen healthy participants were included in a single-blinded trial with the intake of Diet soft drink, Regular soft drink, Water + sweeteners, Low sucrose content (3.5 g), and Water (blank) in 5 different days. In each day, saliva was collected at T0 (fasting), T1 (15 min after test-drink intake), T2 (30 min), T3 (60 min), and T4 (120 min) for the measurement of salivary aspartame (HPLC), TP, AMI (ELISA assays) and insulin levels (chemiluminescence). Chi-square, Friedman, ANOVA and Spearman correlation tests were applied. The late-perceived sweet/sour residual flavor was reported at a frequency of 80%, 60% and 20% after ingestion of artificially sweetened drinks, beverages with sucrose, and plain water, respectively (p < 0.05). Aspartame was detected in saliva after artificially sweetened drinks intake, with highest area under the peak for the Diet soft drink (p = 0.014). No change was observed for TP and AMI levels during the 120 min. Insulin levels increased 1 h after soft-drinks ingestion (regular and diet), while the levels did not change for Low sucrose content and Water + sweeteners test-drinks. Salivary aspartame correlated with insulin levels only after Diet soft drink intake (rho ≥ 0.7; p < 0.05). As aspartame can be detected in saliva and swallowed again until completely excreted, these results contribute to the knowledge of the biological fate of artificial sweeteners and the study of health outcomes.

Fu, C. X., et al. (2026). "Artificial sweeteners and antibiotics enhance the dissemination and diversity of antibiotic resistance genes in a soil-water continuum." Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering 14(1).
	The global spread of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) poses critical threats to public health, driven by their ability to persist and migrate across interconnected environmental compartments (e.g. soil and water). While antibiotics can exert strong selective pressure on ARGs, emerging evidence suggests that non-antibiotic pollutants, including artificial sweeteners, may play a significant role in ARG dissemination. However, the effects of chemical co-exposure on ARG dynamics within the soil-water continuum remain poorly understood. In this study, we conducted microcosm experiments to investigate ARG temporal dynamics in the soil-water continuum under co-exposure of antibiotic enrofloxacin and artificial sweetener cyclamate. Co-exposure significantly increased ARG diversity, with a particular enrichment of multidrug resistance genes. Exposure to these chemicals induced notable shifts in bacterial diversity and composition. Enrofloxacin had a greater impact on soil resistomes, while cyclamate primarily affected the resistomes of overlying water. This differential effect was attributed to distinct water solubility profiles of enrofloxacin and cyclamate. Our results demonstrated that frequent migration of ARGs between soil and overlying water, with co-exposure to enrofloxacin and cyclamate enhancing ARG transfer from soil to overlying water. Strong correlations between ARGs, bacterial communities, and chemical concentrations indicated that enrofloxacin and cyclamate are key drivers of ARG temporal dynamics. Metagenomic results further revealed potential mechanisms through which enrofloxacin and cyclamate exposure affect ARGs by affecting bacterial amino acid synthesis and phosphatase metabolism. These findings underscore the role of chemical co-exposure in promoting ARG migration within the soil-water continuum, providing new insights into ARG dissemination in complex multi-media ecosystems.

Fuentealba Arévalo, F., et al. (2019). "Consumption of non-caloric sweeteners among pregnant Chileans: a cross-sectional study." Nutr Hosp 36(4): 890-897.
	Introduction: consumption of non-caloric sweeteners (NCS) has increased worldwide in the last 35 years. Objective: to determine the consumption of NCS among pregnant Chilean women and measure if consumption exceeded the acceptable daily intake. Methods: we conducted a cross-sectional study of pregnant women from the two main cities in Chile. Women were interviewed to determine the consumption of NCS and socioeconomic level; anthropometry was measured. Results: six hundred and one pregnant women were interviewed; 98% of pregnant women surveyed consumed NCS. The most consumed sweetener was sucralose (95.6%), followed by acesulfame k (80.6%), stevia (78.3%), aspartame (75.1%), saccharin (14.8%), and cyclamate (10%). We observed that consumption closest to the acceptable daily intake was reported for stevia (82.5%), followed by acesulfame k (44%). However, except stevia, which reached 12%, average values were under 5% of the acceptable daily intake. No pregnant woman in the sample exceeded the acceptable daily intake and there were no differences in sweetener consumption by trimester of pregnancy or by socioeconomic level. Conclusions: a high prevalence of NCS consumption was observed, however, none of the pregnant women exceeded the acceptable daily intake.

Furrer, V., et al. (2025). "Source-specific dynamics of organic micropollutants in combined sewer overflows." Water Res. 279: 123416.
	Combined sewer overflows (CSOs) discharge organic micropollutants (MPs) into open water bodies, posing potential environmental threats. Knowledge of the numbers, sources, and dynamics of MPs during CSOs is scarce but crucial for assessing their impact and developing mitigation strategies. To shed light on the dynamics of dissolved organic MPs in CSOs, we conducted high-temporal-resolution sampling (10 min composite samples) followed by liquid chromatog. high-resolution mass spectrometry anal., both target (60 substances) and nontarget, at two CSO sites in a small [17 ha reduced (hared)] and a large (368 hared) catchment for over 10 events each. We observe similar patterns among indoor substances in the large catchment and among tire-associated compounds in both catchments, indicating source-specific behavior. Due to high and diverse concentration variability, no temporal correlations were found among indoor substances in the small catchment or among pesticides in either catchment. A random forest classifier was applied to assign nontarget time series to indoor and road sources in the large catchment. The results indicate that CSOs discharge several thousand substances from indoor sources, followed by a few hundred from outdoor sources with continuous leaching. These high numbers substantially surpass the scope of traditional target lists and underscore the importance of broad-spectrum screening methods when assessing MP contamination.

Gajdos, S., et al. (2023). "Synergistic removal of pharmaceuticals and antibiotic resistance from ultrafiltered WWTP effluent: Free-floating ARGs exceptionally susceptible to degradation." J. Environ. Manage. 340: 117861.
	To protect the environment and human health, antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) and persistent pharmaceuticals need to be removed from WWTP effluent prior to its reuse. However, an efficient process for removing free-floating extracellular DNA (exDNA) in combination with a wide range of pharmaceuticals is yet to be reported for real process conditions. As a possible solution, we treated real ultrafiltered WWTP effluent with UV/H2O2 and combined GAC and zeolite sorption. In terms of exDNA, sequencing and high-throughput quant. PCR (HT-qPCR) showed that exDNA is a potent carrier of numerous ARGs in ultrafiltered WWTP effluent (123 ARGs), including multi-drug efflux pump mexF that became the dominant exARG in GAC effluent over time. Due to the exposure to degradation agents, exDNA was reduced more efficiently than intracellular DNA, and overall levels of ARGs were substantially lowered. Moreover, GAC sorption was particularly effective in the removal of almost all the 85 detected pharmaceutical residues, with fresh GAC demonstrating an efficiency of up to 100%. However, zeolite (Si/Al 0.8) addition was needed to enhance the removal of persistent pollutants such as gabapentin and diclofenac to 57% and up to 100%, resp. Our combined approach eminently decreases the hazardous effects of pharmaceuticals and antibiotic resistance in the ultrafiltered WWTP effluent, producing effluent suitable for multiple reuse options according to the latest legislation. In addition, we provided similarly promising but less extensive data for surface water and treated greywater.

Goh, S. G., et al. (2024). "A multi-pronged approach to assessing antimicrobial resistance risks in coastal waters and aquaculture systems." Water Res. 266: 122353.
	Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a global challenge that has impacted aquaculture and surrounding marine environments. In this study, a year-long monitoring program was implemented to evaluate AMR in two different aquaculture settings (i.e., open cage farming, recirculating aquaculture system (RAS)) and surrounding marine environment within a tropical coastal region. The objectives of this study are to (i) investigate the prevalence and co-occurrence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria (ARB), antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), antibiotics (AB) and various associated chem. compounds at these study sites; (ii) explore the contributing factors to development and propagation of AMR in the coastal environment; and (iii) assess the AMR risks from different perspectives based on the three AMR determinants (i.e., ARB, ARGs and AB). Key findings revealed a distinct pattern of AMR across the different aquaculture settings, notably a higher prevalence of antibiotic-resistant Vibrio at RAS outfalls, suggesting a potential accumulation of microorganisms within the treatment system. Despite the relative uniform distribution of ARGs across marine sites, specific genes such as qepA, blaCTX-M and bacA, were found to be abundant in fish samples, especially from the RAS. Variations in chem. contaminant prevalence across sites highlighted possible anthropogenic impacts. Moreover, environmental and seasonal variations were found to significantly influence the distribution of ARGs and chem. compounds in the coastal waters. Hierarchical cluster anal. that was based on ARGs, chem. compounds and environmental data, categorized the sites into three distinct clusters which reflected strong association with location, seasonality and aquaculture activities. The observed weak correlations between ARGs and chem. compounds imply that low environmental concentrations may be insufficient for resistance selection. A comprehensive risk assessment using methodologies such as the multiple antibiotic resistance (MAR) index, comparative AMR risk index (CAMRI) and Risk quotient (RQ) underscored the complexity of AMR risks. This research significantly contributes to the understanding of AMR dynamics in natural aquatic systems and provides valuable insights for managing and mitigating AMR risks in coastal environments.

Gonzalez, K. M., et al. (2006). "Experience with Na-cyclamate, but not acesulfame-K, induces increased taste sensitivity for glucose." Chemical Senses 31(8): E45-E45.
	
Hammond, D. A. (2005). Analysis of soft drinks and fruit juices. 978-0-47099-582-2: 236-278.
	
Han, C. Q., et al. (2017). "Rapid and sensitive detection of sodium saccharin in soft drinks by silver nanorod array SERS substrates." Sensors and Actuators B-Chemical 251: 272-279.
	Sodium saccharin (SS) is a commonly used synthetic sweetener in carbonated soft drinks and beverages. Long-term consumption of SS could result in health problems. Here, a sensitive surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) method with silver nanorod (AgNR) array substrates was explored for quantification of SS in soft drinks. The AgNR array substrates fabricated by an oblique angle deposition technique exhibited an excellent SERS activity with an enhancement factor of 108. A good linear relationship was demonstrated between SERS peak intensity and SS concentration in the concentration range of 0.5-100 mg/L, and a limit of detection was determined to be 0.3 mg/L. The detection of SS in different soft drinks was further explored by combining SERS spectra with the partial least squares discriminant analysis. The results showed that the LODs of SS from Sprite, Cola, Fanta and Schweppes detected by SERS were 20, 5, 20 and 10 mg/L, respectively, which was far below the national standard. This SERS-based method enables the rapid and highly sensitive detection of SS with minimal sample pretreatment, and holds great promise in this food safety application. (C) 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Han, Y., et al. (2022). "Non-target, suspect and target screening of chemicals of emerging concern in landfill leachates and groundwater in Guangzhou, South China." Sci. Total Environ. 837: 155705.
	Landfill sites have been regarded as a significant source of chems. of emerging concern (CECs) in groundwater. However, our understanding about the compositions of CECs in landfill leachate and adjacent groundwater is still very limited. Here we investigated the CECs in landfill leachates and groundwater of Guangzhou in South China by target, suspect and non-target anal. using high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). A variety of CECs (n = 242), including pharmaceuticals (n = 64), pharmaceutical intermediates (n = 18), personal care products (n = 9), food additives (n = 18), industrial chems. (n = 82, e.g., flame retardants, plasticizers, antioxidants and catalysts), pesticides (n = 26), transformation products (n = 8) and other organic compounds (n = 17) were (tentatively) identified by non-target and suspect screening. 142 CECs were quantitated with target anal., and among them 37, 24 and 27 CECs were detected resp. in the raw leachate (272-1780μg/L), treated leachate (0.25-0.81μg/L) and groundwater (0.10-53.7μg/L). The CECs in the raw leachates were efficiently removed with the removal efficiencies greater than 88.7%. Acesulfame, bisphenol F and ketoprofen were the most abundant compounds in both treated leachate and groundwater. The CECs in groundwater was found most likely to be originated from the landfill sites. Our results highlight the importance of non-target screening in identifying CECs, and reveal the contamination risk of groundwater by landfill leachate.

Hasan, H., et al. (2023). "EFFECT OF SACCHARIN AND CYCLAMATE LONG TERM CONSUMPTION ON BIOCHEMICAL PARAMETERS OF HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS AND PATIENTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS." Diabetes Technology & Therapeutics 25: A239-A239.
	
Hashemi, M., et al. (2011). "Determination of cyclamate in artificial sweeteners and beverages using headspace single-drop microextraction and gas chromatography flame-ionisation detection." Food Chemistry 124(3): 1258-1263.
	A new method for determination of cyclamate was developed using headspace single-drop microextraction (HS-SDME) and gas chromatography (GC). The method is based on the reaction of cyclamate and nitrite in the acidic media and microextraction of cyclohexene formed for subsequent determination with GC. Conditions for both derivatisation and HS-SDME have been optimised. The calibration curve for cyclamate determination showed good linearity in the range of 30-1000 mu mol L-1 (R-2 = 0.9992) and the limit of detection (S/N = 3) was estimated to be 5 mu mol L-1. The repeatability and reproducibility for a 200 mu mol L-1 of cyclamate were 4% and 4.8% (N = 5), respectively. The purposed method was successfully applied for determination of cyclamate in beverages and sweetener tablets. The average recovery of spiked samples was 97%. The results demonstrated that the developed method is simple, rapid, inexpensive, accurate and remarkably free from interference effects. (C) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Hassan, A., et al. (2006). "Experience with Na-cyclamate, but not acesulfame-K, induces increased taste discrimination ability for glucose." Chemical Senses 31(5): A50-A50.
	
Hayat, M. F., et al. (2026). "Sodium cyclamate alters cardiac homeostasis via immunoinflammatory signaling modulation: A multi-biomarkers and in-silico evaluation." Journal of Environmental Sciences 162: 552-561.
	Sodium cyclamate (SC) is a non-nutritive artificial food sweetener that is widely used in the food industry owing to its low cost, and long-lasting sweetness. The present investigation was planned to investigate the sub-chronic effects of SC on cardiac tissues at different dose concentrations. Thirty-six Sprague Dawley male rats were categorized into control, SC (50 mg/kg), SC (100 mg/kg) and SC (500 mg/kg) treated group. SC intoxication upregulated the expression of myeloid differentiation primary response protein (MyD88), interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptor associated kinase 1 (IRAK1), nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), while suppressing the expression of nuclear factor-kappa B inhibitor alpha (I kappa B alpha). Enzymatic activities ofheme-oxygenase-1 (HO-1), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), glutathione reductase (GSR), catalase (CAT), glutathione S-transferase (GST), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were reduced while the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and malondialdehyde (MDA) were escalated after SC exposure. The levels of cardiac injury markers including creatine phosphokinase (CPK), pro B-type natriuretic peptide (ProBNP), troponin-T, creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB), Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), C-reactive protein, B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), and troponin-I were escalated after SC administration. SC intoxication increased the levels of cysteine-aspartic protease-9 (Caspase-9), Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) and cysteine-aspartic protease-3 (Caspase-3) while diminishing the levels of B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2). SC administration substantially compromised the normal histology of cardiac tissues. These findings suggest that SC showed cardiotoxic effects therefore, it is imperative to conduct clinical trials to validate these findings in humans.

Hayouni, W., et al. (2025). "Contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) as indicators of pollution and hydrological processes in an anthropized mediterranean water basin: Case of the Kasserine Basin (Central Tunisia)." Sci. Total Environ. 984: 179744.
	This study investigates the occurrence of 368 emerging contaminants of concern (CECs) in surface and groundwater in the semi-arid Mediterranean basin of Kasserine, central Tunisia (North Africa). It provides the most detailed and up-to-date dataset on organic pollution in the region. A total of 101 emerging contaminants were detected in both surface water and groundwater during a monitoring campaign conducted in May 2023, providing a comprehensive overview of organic pollution in this catchment. Most of the pollutants were detected more frequently in surface waters, where they were generally found in higher concentrations, suggesting that wastewater discharges into watercourses are the main source of these pollutants. Pharmaceutical products were identified as the most frequently detected groups of contaminants, highlighting their prevalence in the samples analyzed. Hydrophobic CECs showed the highest detection frequencies and concentrations In contrast, hydrophilic contaminants, despite their biodegradability, are more easily transported by water flows to the lower parts of the study catchment. The direct connection between the shallow Plio-Quaternary (PQ) aquifer and surface pollution sources facilitates the spread of a wide range of emerging compounds The PQ aquifer is composed of sand and gravel layers and allows rapid migration of contaminants from the surface to the groundwater. The geol. of this aquifer increases its susceptibility to contamination. This approach has allowed the development of a conceptual representation of the vulnerability of the aquifer to urban pressures and the prediction of the impact of further urbanisation on groundwater quality. These findings highlight the need for rigorous management strategies to monitor and mitigate the impact of CECs in this vulnerable region, in order to protect the quality of surface and groundwater resources.

He, H., et al. (2025). "Exploring potential mechanisms of artificial sweeteners in polycystic ovary syndrome through network toxicology and molecular docking." Reprod Toxicol 138: 109073.
	Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrine and metabolic disorder increasingly prevalent among women of reproductive age. Artificial sweeteners, commonly used as sugar substitutes, are now under scrutiny for their potential disruption of metabolic and hormonal equilibrium. This investigation delves into the molecular mechanisms through which seven artificial sweeteners (aspartame, saccharin, sucralose, acesulfame-K, sodium cyclamate, neotame, and alitame) may impact the development of PCOS. By employing network toxicology and molecular docking methodologies, we identified 85 common targets shared between genes associated with sweeteners and those linked to PCOS. Enrichment analyses using Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways unveiled connections to inflammation, insulin resistance, and steroid biosynthesis, particularly implicating pathways such as TNF signaling, AGE-RAGE signaling, and the AMPK pathway. Notably, key targets like TNF, STAT3, and IFNG displayed high binding affinities with artificial sweeteners in molecular docking simulations. These results suggest a potential role for artificial sweeteners in exacerbating PCOS progression through inflammatory and metabolic pathways, underscoring the need for further experimental validation.

Hernandez, N. and J. M. Sanchez (2025). "Validation of a Method for the Determination of Artificial Sweeteners and Caffeine in Soft Drinks: The Impact of Regression Function Selection on Quantification Limits Considering Trueness and Precision." Separations 12(7): 176.
	Method quantification limits are typically determined by measuring variability at blank level only, without accounting for the uncertainties associated with the parameters of the calibration function applied. A method for the determination of artificial sweeteners and caffeine in soft drinks was validated. The effect of chosen regression function on quantification limits was assessed, considering both trueness and precision. The validated method exhibited heteroscedasticity for all analytes, which is common in exptl. methods. A linear response was observed within the working range for sweeteners, while a quadratic regression was required for caffeine. Due to the heteroscedasticity nature of the responses, weighted regressions were necessary to obtain the lowest method quantification limits, allowing for accurate (i.e., unbiased and precise) estimates at the lower end of the calibration range. Under weighted conditions, the regression equations obtained, with an upper range set at 600 mg·L-1, were as follows: y = 3.9 + 58.9x for acesulfame K; y = 0.8 + 185.1x for saccharin; y = 3.5 + 43.3x for aspartame, and y = -7 + 159x - 0.242x2for caffeine. The method quantification limits determined using weighted regressions were 2 mg·L-1 for each analyte, whereas these limits increased to 20 mg·L-1 when non-weighted regressions were applied. The choice of regression function for transforming instrumental signals into analyte concentrations significantly affects the determination of quantification limits, owing to the inherent heteroscedasticity of anal. and bioanal. calibrations. Weighted regressions are essential for producing accurate estimates at lower concentration levels. Applying weighted regression in the context of heteroscedastic calibrations can lead to quantification limits that are more than 10 times lower than unweighted approaches.

Hernando, D., et al. (1999). "Liquid chromatographic determination of aniline in table-top sweeteners based on pre-column derivatization with 1,2-naphthoquinone-4-sulfonate." J Chromatogr A 859(2): 227-233.
	A liquid chromatographic method for the determination of aniline in cyclamate sweeteners based on a pre-column derivatization with 1,2-naphthoquinone-4-sulfonate (NQS) is proposed. Aniline traces were extracted from the cyclamate samples using dichloromethane. After solvent evaporation, the dry residue was derivatized with NQS at pH 9.5 and 85 degrees C for 1 min. The aniline derivative, which was extracted from the reacting mixture, was redissolved in the eluent solution and injected into the chromatographic system. The separation of aniline derivative from other amine impurities was carried out in a C18 column using a 2% acetic acid-methanol (40:60, v/v) mobile phase. Results from the analysis of aniline in the sweetener samples with the proposed method were compared with those from the standard method. A good concordance between the two methods was observed.

Hickert, S., et al. (2025). "Nitrite testing in excipients - Industry best practices." Eur J Pharm Sci 213: 107236.
	NNitrosamine risk assessment and control are essential components of pharmaceutical drug development and product evaluation. Nitrites present in excipients pose a risk to vulnerable amines that are present in APIs, API impurities or other process related amines, as they can be nitrosated to form N-nitrosamines. Detection and quantification of nitrite in excipients is an essential undertaking within the pharmaceutical industry to inform nitrosamine risk assessment and related risk mitigation strategies. An industry consortium and Lhasa Nitrites database was established to collaborate on this challenge, share knowledge, and reduce the testing burden. This article demonstrates the existing understanding of analytical techniques within this consortium for the quantification of nitrite in excipients incorporating IC with conductivity or UV detection, Griess derivatisation (with subsequent HPLC-UV or MS/MS detection or as PCD after IC), DAN derivatisation (with FL and MS detection) and cyclamate derivatisation (with GC-FID or GC-MS detection). We aim to highlight a variety of best practices as well as detailing their techniques principles, performance characteristics and sample preparation. Utilising the nitrite results in the database has highlighted a range in LOQs of nitrite that can be achieved, as well as knowledge of the advantages and disadvantages of using each analytical technique. This publication aims to facilitate the selection of an appropriate analytical method when considering nitrite in excipient determination.

Huff, J. and L. Tomatis (2000). "Re: Long-term toxicity and carcinogenicity study of cyclamate in nonhuman primates (Takayama et al., Toxicol. Sci. 53, 33-39)." Toxicol Sci 57(1): 186.
	
Hunt, F., et al. Cyclamate, CRC Press.
	A review on the production, phys. characteristics, relative sweetness and utility, admixture potential, tech. qualities, utility, availability, shelf life, transport, general cost/economics, metabolism, carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, other toxicity, and regulatory status of cyclamate.

Iwaki, H., et al. (1999). "Purification and characterization of a novel cyclohexylamine oxidase from the cyclohexylamine-degrading Brevibacterium oxydans IH-35A." Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering 88(3): 264-268.
	Cyclohexylamine oxidase (CHAO) from a cell extract of Brevibacterium grown on cyclohexylamine was purified 50.2-fold, to electrophoretic homogeneity, by serial chromatographies. The molecular mass of the native enzyme was estimated to be approximately 50 kDa by gel filtration and SDS-PAGE. The optimum pH was 7.4 and the stable pH range was 6.0 to 7.0. The enzyme was thermostable up to 30 degrees C. The enzyme was found to be highly specific for the deamination of alicyclic monoamines such as cyclopentylamine, cycloheptylamine, and N-methylcyclohexylamine and aliphatic monoamines, such as sec-butylamine. The apparent K-m value for cyclohexylamine was 1.23 mM. The enzyme was inhibited by flavin enzyme inhibitors such as quinine and quinacrine. The N-terminal 27 amino acid residues were determined as Gly-Ser-Val-Thr-Pro-Asp-Pro-Asp-Val-Asp-Val-Ile-His-Gly-Ala-Gly-Ser-Gly-Ser-Ala-Leu, revealing homology to conventional flavin-containing amine oxidases (EC 1.4.3.4).

Jia, H. Q., et al. (2025). "Rapid detection of aspartame in beverages using a molecularly imprinted polymer-based fluorescence sensor." Food Research International 218.
	With growing concerns about aspartame safety in beverages, we present a novel fluorescent molecularly imprinted polymer (FMIP) sensor designed for rapid, low-cost aspartame detection. By strategically selecting functional monomers and cross-linkers, and optimizing polymerization conditions, the FMIP sensor achieved high specificity for aspartame with ultrafast response (10 min, faster than conventional methods). The sensor demonstrated a wide linear range (1-100 mu M), low detection limit (0.68 mu M), and exceptional practicality in beverage analysis, showing appropriate recoveries (89-103 %) and precision (RSD <4.5 %) in real samples. This work provides the first FMIP-based platform combining speed, sensitivity, and cost-effectiveness for on-site aspartame monitoring.

Jiang, L., et al. (2024). "Obesogenic potentials of environmental artificial sweeteners with disturbances on both lipid metabolism and neural responses." Sci Total Environ 919: 170755.
	Artificial sweeteners (ASs) entered the environments after application and emissions. Recent studies showed that some ASs had obesogenic risks. However, it remained unclear whether such risks are common and how they provoke such effects. Presently, the effects of 8 widely used ASs on lipid accumulation were measured in Caenorhabditis elegans. Potential mechanisms were explored with feeding and locomotion behavior, lipid metabolism and neural regulation. Results showed that acesulfame (ACE), aspartame (ASP), saccharin sodium (SOD), sucralose (SUC) and cyclamate (CYC) stimulated lipid accumulation at μg/L levels, showing obesogenic potentials. Behavior investigation showed that ACE, ASP, SOD, SUC and CYC biased more feeding in the energy intake aspect against the locomotion in the energy consumption one. Neotame (NEO), saccharin (SAC) and alitame (ALT) reduced the lipid accumulation without significant obesogenic potentials in the present study. However, all 8 ASs commonly disturbed enzymes (e.g., acetyl-CoA carboxylase) in lipogenesis and those (e.g., carnitine palmitoyl transferase) in lipolysis. In addition, ASs disturbed PPARγ (via expressions of nhr-49), TGF-β/DAF-7 (daf-7) and SREBP (sbp-1) pathways. Moreover, they also interfered neurotransmitters including serotonin (5-HT), dopamine (DA) and acetylcholine (ACh), with influences in Gsα (e.g., via expressions of gsα-1, ser-7), glutamate (e.g., mgl-1), and cGMP-dependent signaling pathways (e.g., egl-4). In summary, environmental ASs commonly disturbed neural regulation connecting behavior and lipid metabolism, and 5 out of 8 showed clear obesogenic potentials. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPLICATION: Artificial sweeteners (ASs) are become emerging pollutants after wide application and continuous emission. Recent studies showed that some environmental ASs had obesogenic risks. The present study employed Caenorhabditis elegans to explore the influences of 8 commonly used ASs on lipid metabolisms and also the underlying mechanisms. Five out of 8 ASs stimulated lipid accumulation at μg/L levels, and they biased energy intake against energy consumption. The other three ASs reduced the lipid accumulation. ASs commonly disturbed lipogenesis and lipolysis via PPARγ, TGF-β and SREBP pathways, and also influenced neurotransmitters with Gsα, glutamate and cGMP-dependent signaling pathways.

Jing, J., et al. (2023). "Rapid and sensitive quantification of cyclamate in beverages by miniature microplasma optical emission spectrometry." Food Chem 406: 135077.
	Most of the available methods for the quantification of cyclamate depend on laboratory instruments and their application in the field was limited. Herein, a simple and sensitive method was developed for the determination of cyclamate in beverage samples based on chemical vapor generation and miniature point discharge optical emission spectrometry (μPD-OES). The combination of headspace sampling and μPD-OES not only simplifies the separation process of cyclamate, improves sensitivity, and alleviates matrix interference but also eliminates the use of a bulky and expensive instrument. Under the optimal conditions, this method provided a limit of detection of 0.1 mg L(-1) comparable to or better than most reported methods. The method eventually was applied to 14 different beverages and cyclamate was found below the threshold set by Chinese Standards for Food Additives. The proposed method provides great potential for the field analysis of cyclamate in the supervision of food safety.

Khezami, F., et al. (2024). "Occurrence of contaminants of emerging concern and pesticides and relative risk assessment in Tunisian groundwater." Sci. Total Environ. 906: 167319.
	Groundwater is an important source for drinking water supply, agricultural irrigation and industrial uses in the Middle East and North Africa region. Due to the growing need for groundwater use, groundwater quality studies on the presence of contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) and pesticides have gained attention. The Wadi El Bey is one of the most polluted areas in Tunisia. However, very limited data on CECs infiltration into aquifers has been described, in comparison to industrialized countries where groundwater contamination has been comprehensively addressed. To gain early insight into potential contamination, groundwater wells in northeast Tunisia, an area with high population d. and intensive agricultural activity were sampled during two seasons and were analyzed with two high resolution mass spectrometry approaches: target and suspect screening. The latter was used for screening banned pesticides. A selection of 116 CECs of which 19 are transformation products (TPs) and 20 pesticides previously prioritized by suspect screening were screened in the groundwater samples. The results showed the presence of 69 CECs and 1 TP and 20 pesticides at concentrations per well, ranging between 43 and 7384 ng L-1 and 7.3 and 80 ng L-1, resp. CECs concentrations in Tunisian groundwater do not differ from those in industrialized countries. WWTPs were considered the main source of pollution, where the main classes detected were analgesics, antihypertensives and artificial sweeteners and especially caffeine, salicylic acid and ibuprofen were found to be ubiquitous. Regarding pesticides, triazines herbicides and carbamates insecticides pose the highest concern due to their ubiquitous presence, high leachability potential for most of them and high toxicity. The environmental risk assessment (ERA) highlighted the high risk that caffeine, ibuprofen, and propoxur may pose to the environment, and consequently, to non-target organisms. This study provides occurrence and ERA anal. of CECs and pesticides in Tunisian groundwater.

Kokotou, M. G., et al. Intense sweeteners, CRC Press.
	A review and discussion on anal. methods and sample preparation techniques for the determination of intense sweeteners in foodstuffs.

Koumaki, E., et al. (2025). "Circular water management in agriculture: Screening of contaminants of emerging concern in a real-world water-soil-crop system and human health risk assessment." J. Hazard. Mater. 492: 138167.
	Water reuse in agriculture supports climate resilience and circular economy principles, yet concerns remain regarding contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) in reclaimed water. This study investigates the occurrence, uptake, and potential risks of CECs in maize cultivated under two irrigation scenarios: precision drip irrigation using groundwater and reclaimed wastewater. A wide-scope target anal. of over 2200 CECs was performed in groundwater, raw and treated wastewater, irrigated soil, and maize plant tissues. A total of 104 CECs across nine chem. classes were detected in water samples, with wastewater treatment reducing 67% of detected compounds However, several pharmaceuticals and transformation products persisted post-treatment. Soil irrigated with treated wastewater exhibited a greater variety and higher concentrations of CECs than groundwater-irrigated soil. Maize plants accumulated 14 CECs in roots, stems, leaves, and corn, with higher concentrations in reclaimed water-irrigated crops. A human health risk assessment, based on the threshold of toxicol. concern and hazard quotient approaches, indicated negligible risks at detected concentrations and expected dietary exposure levels. However, substances flagged for potential genotoxicity via in silico tools, such as acetaminophen and harmane, warrant further evaluation. These findings highlight the need for improved monitoring and targeted removal strategies to ensure safe and sustainable agricultural applications.

Kravos, A., et al. (2025). "Aquatic photochemistry and transformations of multiclass emerging organic contaminants in environmental water matrices." J. Photochem. Photobiol., A 469: 116491.
	This study shows a comprehensive assessment of the photodegradation of 18 multiclass contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) in simulated river and marine aquatic compartments. Degradation trends, mineralization, and defluorination of the target CECs were monitored in model matrixes, artificial and real seawater, with and without aeration. Each model matrix contained a natural abiotic factor of interest, i.e., chloride, nitrate, humic acid, lignosulfonate, and iron, all naturally present in surface water. Transformation pathways were investigated by UHPLC-MS/MS and for the identified transformation products (TPs), their ecotoxicities were predicted in silico. Only 8 out of 18 selected CECs were found to be significantly photolabile, especially rosuvastatin. Direct photolysis was their primary degradation route, while abiotic factors either accelerated or suppressed the degradation depending on the type of CEC. Real and artificial seawater mostly acted inhibitory. Oxygen aeration mostly accelerated degradation showing the effect of singlet oxygen. Low mineralization and defluorination were in most cases linked to the formation of stable and relatively more toxic TPs, which were characteristic for rosuvastatin. Main identified TPs were screened in real river water and seawater (North Adriatic Sea water basin, Slovenia, Europe). Rosuvastatin's TP ROS-349 was detected with a high confidence level for the first time, which may raise environmental concerns. Overall, advanced assessment of aquatic photochem. is achieved by using low concentrations, mixtures of multiclass CECs, UV light above 300 nm, more realistic matrixes, as well as by identifying, ranking, and analyzing the TPs in actual aquatic environment.

Krmela, A., et al. (2020). "A Simple LC-MS Multi-Analyte Method to Determine Food Additives and Caffeine in Beverages." Lc Gc Europe 33(7): 327-335.
	A simple LC-MS method has been developed and validated for the simultaneous determination of 18 synthetic food additives and caffeine in soft and energy drinks, and in various alcoholic beverages. Nine food colours (tartrazine, sunset yellow FCF, azorubine, ponceau 4R, allura red AC, patent blue V, brilliant blue FCF, green S, brilliant black BN), two preservatives (sorbic and benzoic acid) and seven sweeteners (acesulfame K, aspartame, cyclamic acid, saccharin, sucralose, neohesperidin DC, neotame) were targeted food additives. The method employs reversed-phase ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) for analyte separation and a single quadrupole mass spectrometer for their detection. The limits of quantification were low enough to enable a reliable control of maximum limits set for some additives (Regulation [EC] No. 1333/2008). The method was applied for analysis of a wide range of samples collected at a typical supermarket: 14 soft drinks, 19 energy drinks, and 43 alcoholic beverages.

Kulandaivelu, J., et al. (2023). "Fate of micropollutants in a lab-scale urban wastewater system: Impact of iron-rich drinking water treatment sludge." J. Hazard. Mater. Adv. 12: 100360.
	Iron rich drinking water treatment sludge (Fe-DWTS) could be a potential alternative for Fe salts in controlling sulfide in the sewer network. This study investigated the impact of in-sewer dosed Fe-DWTS on the fate of 26 different intrinsic organic micropollutants in wastewater by using a lab-scale integrated system consisting of sewer reactors and a sequential batch reactor (SBR) to simulate urban wastewater collection and treatment. The batch results revealed that seven among these 26 compounds had higher removal in the Fe-DWTS dosed sewer reactor compared to the control sewer reactor. In contrast, the removal of 7 out of the 26 investigated compounds were reduced, along with the biofilm methanogenic activity due to the long-term Fe-DWTS dosing. Cycle experiments in the SBR showed that the removal of acesulfame was enhanced and the formation of carbamazepine, desvenlafaxine, tramadol and hydrochlorothiazide were reduced, compared to their behavior in the control SBR. However, the long-term experiments showed no adverse or beneficial effect of in-sewer dosed Fe-DWTS on the removal of most micropollutants in the SBR. Codeine, trimethoprim and gabapentin were exceptions with slightly higher concentrations in the exptl. SBR effluent, possibly due to change in microbial composition

Kürth, J., et al. (2013). "Recurrent transient renal Fanconi syndrome: adverse effect of the artificial sweetener cyclamate." Swiss Medical Weekly 143: 26S-26S.
	
Labad, F., et al. (2023). "Occurrence, data-based modelling, and risk assessment of emerging contaminants in an alluvial aquifer polluted by river recharge." Environ. Pollut. (Oxford, U. K.) 316(Part_1): 120504.
	This research presents the occurrence and fate of 121 contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) in an urban aquifer polluted by river recharge through a data-base modeling. Afterwards, risk quotients (RQs) are computed to determine the risk posed by CECs to human health. To this end, groundwater and river water samples were collected in four campaigns conducted from Feb. to May 2021. Results show that 46 CECs are ubiquitous in groundwater and their concentrations vary several orders of magnitude, ranging from below the limit of quantification to 44.5·103 ng/L for iopamidol. Transformation products (TPs) are usually detected at lower concentrations than those of the parent substances but there are some exceptions (i.e., fipronil sulfide, fipronil sulfone and O-desmethylvenlafaxine). River concentrations are higher than those detected in groundwater for some CECs, indicating the occurrence of natural attenuation processes when river water infiltrates the aquifer. A data-based advection-reaction modeling is proposed and tested for ca. 40 substances with detection frequencies higher than 90%. It provides useful quant. information regarding the dynamic behavior of the variables monitored, expressed in terms of characteristic length, entropy and synchronized state contribution. Finally, risk quotients (RQs) are used to assess the human health risk posed by the ubiquitous CECs in groundwater. Most CECs do not pose any risk to the different life stages considered, as the RQs evaluated are lower than 0.01. However, the pharmaceuticals valsartan and its TP valsartan acid show RQs higher than 1, indicating that these substances might be harmful to human beings.

Le, A. V. T., et al. (2019). "A novel electrochemical assay for aspartame determination via nucleophilic reactions with caffeic acid ortho-quinone." Electrochimica Acta 300: 67-76.
	Cyclic voltammetry (CV) in a pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution containing aspartame (ASP) and caffeic acid (CAF) was studied. In sharp contrast to untreated electrodes, two distinct redox peaks were observed at preanodized screen-printed carbon electrodes (SPCE*) due to the formation of a homopolymer poly( CAF) and a copolymer poly(CAF-ASP). The characteristics of the polymer film-modified electrodes were well-characterized by atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and the water contact angle technique. Electrochemically induced polymerization mechanisms were discussed. Current responses from poly(CAF-ASP) were employed for ASP determination, and a linear dynamic range from 0.05 mu M to 10 mu M was obtained using differential pulse voltammetry (DPV). The limit of detection (LOD, S/N = 3) was 0.0076 mu M, the limit of quantification (LOQ, S/N = 10) was 0.0256 mu M, and sensitivity was 12.067 mA mu M-1. The relative standard deviation (RSD) was less than 5%, indicating good precision. Common additives in soft drinks do not interfere with the ASP analysis. The proposed assay was applied for the determination of ASP in two soft drinks using the standard addition method, and recoveries in the range of 103.0-106.7% and 97.3-106.4% were obtained for Coca-Cola and Coke Zero, respectively. A reference high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was applied to validate the proposed method, and good agreement was obtained. (C) 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

LeMaire, P. C. K. and L. Iii (2022). "Thermal studies of commercial low calorie sweeteners." Am. J. Anal. Chem. 13(9): 346-364.
	This paper presents the thermal anal. of artificial sweeteners, and natural sugar substitutes. Thermal anal. was done on com. compositions of sweeteners using simultaneous DSC/TGA (SDT). Heat flow, and mass vs. temperature and time thermograms, along with DSC peak enthalpies and transition temperatures are reported. A number of the sweeteners were found to undergo transitions and reactions before or at 190°C (375°F, normal baking temperatures) and all dextrose containing sweeteners show an endothermic peak around 80°C due to the liberation of bound water mols. The major components of sweeteners studied were found to be generally thermostable at or below 100°C.

Lewis, P., et al. (2025). "A bioanalytical and chemical approach for wastewater discharge: Beyond detected chemicals for water quality assessment." Environ. Pollut. (Oxford, U. K.) 383: 126807.
	Targeted chem. anal. is widely used for water quality monitoring but has significant limitations as it cannot detect unknown chems. or account for mixture effects. To address these gaps, effect-based methods (EBM) are gaining interest. Here, we applied a battery of in vitro bioassays to wastewater influent and effluent from four wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in Victoria, Australia, as well as surface water upstream and downstream of the WWTPs, to assess the potential risks from mixture effects. The bioassays were complemented with targeted chem. anal. of over 600 chems. Chem. anal. and bioanal. showed higher chem. concentrations and effects in discharged effluent compared to surface waters, confirming WWTPs as key pollution sources. Though most WWTPs were able to remove over 80% of bacterial toxicity, photosystem II inhibition, estrogenic activity and oxidative stress response, one site had poor removal of estrogenic and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) activity. This site also had a lower median chem. removal efficiency (40%) compared to the other WWTPs (72-88%). Surface water samples downstream of some of the WWTPs exceeded ecol. effect-based trigger values (ecoEBTs), suggesting that effluent discharge contributes to increased estrogenic and AhR activity, as well as oxidative stress. Despite the large number of detected chems., only a small fraction of the observed biol. effects could be explained using iceberg modeling, highlighting the presence of unknown bioactive contaminants. These findings underscore the need for integrating chem. anal. with EBM to more comprehensively assess water quality, and improve protection of aquatic ecosystems, worldwide.

Li, D., et al. (2023). "Use of artificial sweeteners and caffeine in a population of Hanoi: An assessment by wastewater-based epidemiology." Sci. Total Environ. 868: 161515.
	Monitoring the consumption of artificial sweeteners in the population is essential to help public health authorities understand the level of sugar consumption. There is a gap in knowledge of patterns and levels of artificial sweetener consumption in Vietnam. Using wastewater-based epidemiol. (WBE), this study aims to evaluate the use of artificial sweeteners in an urban population in Hanoi, Vietnam. A total of 184 wastewater samples were collected at two sampling sites in an urban canal, receiving sewage from over 400,000 people in three different periods between 2018 and 2020. The population normalized per capita consumption of the five detected artificial sweeteners varied from 0.87 mg d-1 p-1 (sucralose) to 5.2 mg d-1 p-1 (aspartame). The daily consumption of artificial sweeteners was found to be stable throughout the week, however the consumption of artificial sweeteners was influenced by season with higher consumption in summer. Significant correlations (p < 0.01) were found among levels of artificial sweeteners and caffeine in urban canal samples, suggesting these chems. had common sources. Population-weighted consumption load of artificial sweeteners and caffeine was compared in Vietnam, China and Australia, and the per capita consumption load mainly depended on the habitual of tea/coffee drinking in different countries. This was the first study that provided information on the artificial sweetener consumption by wastewater anal. in Vietnam. However, several sources of uncertainty (sample collection, population estimation, other sources of artificial sweeteners in wastewater, etc.) were acknowledged in this study. Further investigations on the spatial-temporal variation of artificial sweetener consumption with more intensive sampling scheme in Vietnam are recommended.

Li, D., et al. (2022). "Young population consume twice as much artificial sweetener than the general population - A wastewater-based assessment in China." Sci Total Environ 839: 156200.
	Understanding artificial sweetener consumption patterns and levels in different demographics is important for formulating public health policies on controlling sugar consumption. There is a considerable knowledge gap with respect to the pattern of artificial sweetener consumption in China. To narrow this gap, wastewater analysis was used to assess the temporal patterns of consumption of seven artificial sweeteners in an urban population and a university town in a megacity in South China over a one-year period. Daily influent wastewater samples were collected from an urban catchment and weekly samples collected from a university sub-catchment. Population normalized per capita consumption of the four detected artificial sweeteners (cyclamate, acesulfame, sucralose and saccharin) in the university catchment (1.0-5.9 mg d(-1) p(-1)) was much higher than those in urban catchment (0.5-1.3 mg d(-1) p(-1)), indicating younger population consume more artificial sweeteners than the general population. The daily consumption of artificial sweeteners was found to be stable throughout the week in the urban catchment. Time-series analysis showed that an average increase in temperature of 1 °C was associated with an increase consumption of 33 μg d(-1) p(-1) for acesulfame, 15 μg d(-1) p(-1) for sucralose and 14 μg d(-1) p(-1) for saccharin. This was the first study that objectively quantified the greater consumption of artificial sweeteners (proxy for consumption of artificially sweetened food and beverages) in a younger age group when compared to the general population, which could potentially pose a risk of health related diseases.

Li, J., et al. (2025). "Artificial sweeteners in wastewater treatment plants: A systematic review of global occurrence, distribution, removal, and degradation pathways." J Hazard Mater 494: 138644.
	The widespread use of artificial sweeteners in foods, drinks, and pharmaceuticals has led to rising concentrations in wastewater, with specific sweeteners raising concerns due to demonstrated toxicological risks to ecosystems and humans. To date, a comprehensive summary of the occurrence, distribution, and removal status of artificial sweeteners in wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) is lacking, making it difficult to evaluate the associated risks and environmental impacts. We conducted a systematic review of scientific literature and grey literature with rigorous screening covering 24 countries and 6 continents. Globally, sucralose, acesulfame, saccharin, and cyclamate are prevalent artificial sweeteners in WWTP, with concentrations of 0.6-303.0 µg/L in influent and 0.1-81.2 µg/L in effluent. Sucralose showed obvious increasing concentrations over time in wastewater in the United States and Canada, with an increase of 5.6-5.7 µg/L·y in influent and 4.7-5.5 µg/L·y in effluent. Summer wastewater usually contains 11.1-33.3 % higher concentrations of artificial sweeteners than other seasons. Saccharin and cyclamate are the most easily removable sweeteners (>90.0 % removal) in WWTP, followed by acesulfame (25.0-70.1 %) and sucralose (-10.0-10.0 %). Wastewater treatment processes with longer HRT and more diverse microbial communities showed better performance in sucralose removal, while processes with aerobic conditions showed better performance in acesulfame and saccharin removal than anaerobic processes. Increasing trends for persistent sucralose and acesulfame removal have been observed globally, suggesting potential microbial evolution/adaptation. This review contributes to a comprehensive understanding of the spatiotemporal distribution and ever-evolving biodegradation of artificial sweeteners in WWTP, providing future perspectives and potential policy requirements.

Li, S.-H., et al. (2025). "XGBoost- and Mass Spectrometry-Based Feature Selection for Identifying Metabolic Biomarkers Associated with HBV-Related Liver Disease Progression and Hepatocellular Carcinoma Treatment." J. Proteome Res. 24(11): 5803-5817.
	XGBoost, a gradient boosting algorithm, is widely recognized for its efficiency and robustness in multiclass classification tasks. Metabolomics serves as a powerful tool for biomarker discovery; however, metabolic biomarkers associated with the progression from chronic hepatitis B (CHB) to liver cirrhosis (LC) to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), as well as those related to treatment effects in HCC (HCCAT), remain unclear. In this study, an XGBoost-based machine learning approach combined with mass spectrometry was used to analyze the metabolic profiles of 30 healthy controls (HC), 29 CHB patients, 30 LC patients, 30 HCC patients, and 30 HCCAT patients. Biomarker screening was conducted through three comparative analyses: (1) HC, CHB, LC, HCC, and HCCAT; (2) HC, CHB, LC, and HCC; and (3) HC, HCC, and HCCAT. A total of 17 metabolic biomarkers were identified, among which nine had not been previously associated with HBV-related liver diseases. Notably, a potential biomarker panel composed of eicosenoic acid, dihydromorphine, cysteine, acetic acid, sitosterol, and hypoxanthine showed promise for disease prognosis and therapeutic evaluation. These findings highlight the great potential of integrating metabolomics with machine learning to identify novel metabolic biomarkers related to HBV-associated liver disease progression and treatment response.

Lin, C.-S., et al. (2019). "Assessment of microbiological and chemical quality of bubble tea beverages vended in Taiwan." J. Food Prot. 82(8): 1384-1389.
	Bubble tea beverages (n = 105) purchased from vendors in Taiwan were tested to determine their microbiol. and chem. quality. Nearly half of the tested samples (48.6%, 51 of 105) had aerobic plate counts (APCs) higher than the Taiwan Food and Drug Administration guideline of 4.0 log CFU/mL, and 55 (52.4%) had coliform counts (most probable number [MPN]) higher than the 10 MPN/mL guideline. Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Staphylococcus aureus, sweeteners, preservatives, maleic acid, and coumarin were not detected in any sample. However, catechins were not detected to 188 mg/mL, and caffeine was 10.1 to 457.6 mg/mL. Bubble tea samples obtained from vendors in southern Taiwan had a mean APC of 2.6 log CFU/mL and a mean coliform count of 61.7 MPN/mL; these values were significantly lower (P < 0.05) than those from samples collected from vendors in northern, eastern, or central Taiwan. Samples obtained from southern Taiwan had the highest mean catechin concentrations of 21.3 mg/mL (P < 0.05). About 60% (63 of 105) of the bubble tea samples were not labeled with the origin of the tea leaves, which is in violation of Taiwanese food labeling regulations. In general, the bubble tea beverages tested had satisfactory microbial and chem. qualities.

Lin, X. L., et al. (2024). "Effects of common artificial sweeteners at environmentally relevant concentrations on soil springtails and their gut microbiota." Environ Int 185: 108496.
	Artificial sweeteners (AS) are extensively utilized as sugar substitutes and have been recognized as emerging environmental contaminants. While the effect of AS on aquatic organisms has garnered recent attention, their effects on soil invertebrates and gut microbial communities remain unclear. To address this knowledge gap, we exposed springtails (Folsomia candida) to both single and combined treatments of four typical AS (sucralose [SUC], saccharin [SAC], cyclamate [CYC], and acesulfame [ACE]) at environmentally relevant concentrations of 0.01, 0.1 and 1 mg kg(-1) in soil. Following the first-generational exposure, the reproduction of juveniles showed a significant increase under all the AS treatments of 0.1 mg kg(-1). The transcriptomic analysis revealed significant enrichment of several Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genome pathways (e.g., glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, pentose and glucuronate interconversions, amino sugar, and nucleotide sugar metabolism, ribosome, and lysosome) in springtails under all AS treatments. Analysis of gut bacterial microbiota indicated that three AS (SUC, CYC, and ACE) significantly decreased alpha diversity, and all AS treatments increased the abundance of the genus Achromobacter. After the sixth-generational exposure to CYC, weight increased, but reproduction was inhibited. The pathways that changed significantly (e.g., extracellular matrix-receptor interaction, amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, lysosome) were generally similar to those altered in first-generational exposure, but with opposite regulation directions. Furthermore, the effect on the alpha diversity of gut microbiota was contrary to that after first-generational exposure, and more noticeable disturbances in microbiota composition were observed. These findings underscore the ecological risk of AS in soils and improve our understanding of the toxicity effects of AS on living organisms.

Liu, C. C., et al. (2023). "Light-shading reaction microfluidic PMMA/paper detection system for detection of cyclamate concentration in foods." Food Chem 400: 134063.
	Cyclamate is an artificial sweetener with high sweetness and low calories, and is a common sugar substitute for weight control and diabetic patients. However, excessive cyclamate consumption is associated with various health disorders, and hence it is prohibited as a food additive in many countries around the world. The current research proposes a light-shading reaction microfluidic PMMA/paper detection (MPD) system for determining the cyclamate concentration in food. In the current system, inject 10 μL of the extracted sodium cyclamate sample into the sample chamber of the MPD device, perform the diazotization reaction under shading conditions, and then suck it into the detection area through a paper strip, which consists of a paper chip embedded with modified Bratton-Marshall reagent. Once the paper chip is thoroughly wetted, the MPD device is inserted into a microanalysis box, where a fuchsia azo reaction compound is produced through heating at 40 °C for 3 min. The reaction complex is observed by a camera and the reaction image is wirelessly transmitted to a smartphone, and the concentration of sodium cyclamate is measured through the self-developed grayscale software. The results obtained for the sodium cyclamate samples with a concentration in the range of 50-1000 ppm show that the measured gray value changes linearly with the sodium cyclamate concentration, and the correlation coefficient (R(2)) is 0.9898. By analyzing the concentration of sodium cyclamate in 10 real-world samples, the practical feasibility of the current MPD system is proved. The results showed that the concentration measurement value did not deviate by more than 4.8 % from the value obtained using the conventional liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method.

Logue, C., et al. (2020). "A Novel Urinary Biomarker Approach Reveals Widespread Exposure to Multiple Low-Calorie Sweeteners in Adults." J Nutr 150(9): 2435-2441.
	BACKGROUND: Observational investigations into the health impacts of low-calorie sweeteners (LCSs) in humans fail to adequately identify or fully characterize LCS consumption. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to utilize a novel biomarker approach to investigate exposure to 5 LCSs and to test whether reported low-calorie sweetened beverage (LCSB) consumption effectively identifies exposure to LCSs in adults. METHODS: In this cross-sectional analysis, 2 population studies were conducted in adults. Urinary excretions of 5 LCSs, namely acesulfame-K, saccharin, cyclamate, sucralose, and steviol glycosides, were simultaneously determined using LC tandem-MS. In Study 1, previously collected 24-h urine samples (n = 357) were analyzed. In Study 2, previously collected 24-h urine samples (n = 79) were analyzed to compare urinary excretions of LCSs with self-reported LCSB consumption for identifying LCS exposure. Exposure to LCSs was characterized using descriptive statistics and chi-square tests were performed to assess associations between age-groups and LCS excretion, and to assess the proportion of individuals identified as LCS consumers using biomarker data or reported LCSB consumption. RESULTS: A total of 341 adults (45% men) and 79 adults (39% men) were included in the final analysis of Studies 1 and 2, respectively. In Study 1, >96% of samples contained ≥1 LCS and almost 60% contained ≥3 LCSs. A greater proportion of younger adults (<40 y old) excreted ≥3 LCSs than older adults (>40 y old) (P < 0.001). In Study 2, a much higher prevalence of LCS consumption was observed using biomarker data (92%) than reported LCSB consumption (6%) (P < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: This work indicates widespread exposure to LCSs, suggesting that population-based research to date into LCS exposure and health may be flawed. Therefore, a urinary biomarker approach offers considerable potential for more robust investigations in this area.

Loll, A., et al. (2026). "Bitter truth about artificial sweeteners: A critical review on the ecotoxicity of sucralose, acesulfame, saccharin and cyclamate." Environ Pollut 390: 127493.
	Due to their high stability and water solubility, some artificial sweeteners reach aquatic environments and persist there. Despite the identification of sucralose, acesulfame, saccharin, and cyclamate as emerging pollutants in literature for over a decade, no environmental risk assessment of these substances has been conducted to date. However, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) is currently undertaking a re-evaluation of the authorization of artificial sweeteners, still ongoing for sucralose and cyclamate. The present review demonstrates that all four sweeteners have been identified as being persistent and very mobile in the aquatic environment. The focal point of this review pertains to the ecotoxicity of the four aforementioned sweeteners. The acute toxicity studies conducted on aquatic model organisms demonstrated that there was no overall acute hazard. Nevertheless, a pronounced lack of chronic toxicity studies persists, and data at environmentally relevant concentrations remain scarce, representing a significant knowledge gap. This is a matter of concern, as this review indicates that numerous studies employing alternative endpoints have identified effects within environmentally relevant concentrations. In light of the potential for long-term effects, the reauthorization of the addressed artificial sweeteners warrants careful reconsideration.

Luo, J., et al. (2019). "Ecotoxicity and environmental fates of newly recognized contaminants-artificial sweeteners: A review." Sci Total Environ 653: 1149-1160.
	Artificial sweeteners (ASs) are used in countless application in daily life. ASs are newly recognized as pollutants due to their high detection frequency in various environmental media, which has aroused great concern. This review presents the current knowledge of AS ecotoxicity and possible elimination routes in the environment. The obtained results indicate that the negative impacts of ASs are more severe than previously expected. More attention should be paid to the chronic and metabolite toxicities of ASs. Moreover, numerous processes (physical, chemical and biological) have been reported to be able to degrade ASs. However, the elimination efficiency varies greatly depending on the specific AS and the particular experimental conditions. Cyclamate and saccharin are easily removed, while sucralose and acesulfame are generally persistent. Additionally, there is a large gap in the ASs removal efficiency between bench tests and full-scale studies. The potential for microbial degradation of persistent ASs was reported in some regions, but clarification of the underlying mechanisms is necessary to increase the likelihood of using this approach in wide applications with a satisfactory performance.

Luo, X.-W., et al. (2025). "Facile synthesis of aluminum based metal-organic frameworks for high adsorption of artificial sweeteners in beverages and seasonings: Integrating experimental and computational study." Microchem. J. 218: 115536.
	In this study, a metal organic frameworks named MIL-53(Al) was designed and constructed via a facile one-pot route for the efficient capture artificial sweeteners (ASs). Capitalizing on its high stability, large sp. surface area and π-conjugated backbone, the material showed excellent adsorption capacity and repeatability. Then a solid-phase extraction (SPE) column founded on MIL-53(Al) was fabricated, and it was applied to enriching and analyzing ASs in combination with high performance liquid chromatog.-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). The developed method showed good linearity (r ≥ 0.996), low limit of detection (0.22 ng/L), high precision (RSD < 7.81%). The applicability of the method was evaluated by analyzing six samples (water, beverages and seasonings). The spiked recoveries of ASs in samples ranged from 78.3 to 105%, and ASs (11.2-24.1 ng/L) were detected in beverage samples. The potential adsorption mechanism was also elucidated based on integrated adsorption experiments and simulation calculations In summary, this study establishes a precise method for determining ASs in complex matrixes, offering reliable solutions for environmental monitoring and food safety assessment.

Manuel, M. and S. Kanchi (2025). "Construction of a waste-derived graphite electrode integrated IL/Ni-MOF flowers/Co3O4 NDs for specific enrichment and signal amplification to detect aspartame." Colloids and Surfaces a-Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 705.
	A novel and cost-efficient electrochemical sensor was designed by immobilizing IL/Ni-MOF/Co3O4 nanodiamonds on the graphite (GE) electrode, marking the first application for the detection of aspartame. The graphite electrode was extracted and recycled from discharged batteries to serve as a working electrode. The nanocomposite features unique Co3O4 nanodiamonds, generated using Coriandrum sativum seed extract, alongside Ni-metal organic framework (MOF), which were synthesized through a solvothermal method. The conductivity and stability of the electrochemical sensor were enhanced through the incorporation of the ionic liquid (IL) ([BMIM][MeSO4]. The phytochemical profile of Coriandrum sativum seed extract, analyzed by GC-MS, identified key compounds involved in the synthesis of Co3O4 nanodiamonds. A comprehensive characterization of the nanocomposite was performed using UV-Vis, FTIR, DLS, Zeta potential, XRD, XPS, FE-SEM, TEM, optical profilometry, and AFM to confirm the structural and elemental modifications. Electrochemical characterization of the bare and modified electrodes was conducted through cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The GE/IL/Ni-MOF/Co3O4 nanodiamonds modified electrode displayed enhanced electroanalytical performance for aspartame detection, characterized by signal amplification at +7.0 V. Quantitative analysis by Differential Pulse Voltammetry (DPV) and Square Wave Voltammetry (SWV) revealed a linear detection range of 3-15 mu M for aspartame. A comparison of SWV and DPV revealed superior analytical performance for SWV, with limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) values of 1.02 mu M and 3.1 mu M (R2 = 0.993) compared to 1.81 mu M and 5.5 mu M (R2 = 0.986) for DPV. This study reveals the excellent adsorption capabilities of Ni-MOF and Co3O4 nanodiamonds (Co3O4 NDs), attributed to their high porosity and large surface area, paving the way for the development of affordable sensing devices for artificial sweeteners.

Marazuela, M. A., et al. (2023). "Seasonal biodegradation of the artificial sweetener acesulfame enhances its use as a transient wastewater tracer." Water Res 232: 119670.
	The persistence of the artificial sweetener acesulfame potassium (ACE) during wastewater treatment and subsequently in the aquatic environment has made it a widely used tracer of wastewater inputs to both surface water and groundwater. However, the recently observed biodegradation of ACE during wastewater treatment has questioned the validity of this application. In this study, we assessed the use of ACE not only as a marker of wastewater, but also as a transient wastewater tracer that allows both the calculation of mixing ratios and travel times through the aquifer as well as the calibration of transient groundwater flow and mass transport models. Our analysis was based on data obtained in a nearly 8-year river water and groundwater sampling campaign along a confirmed wastewater-receiving riverbank filtration site located close to a drinking water supply system. We provide evidence that temperature controls ACE concentration and thus its seasonal oscillation. River water data showed that ACE loads decreased from 1.5-4 mg·s(-1) in the cold season (December to June; T<10 °C) to 0-0.5 mg·s(-1) in the warm season (July to November; T>10 °C). This seasonal variability of >600% was detectable in the aquifer and preserved >3 km, with ACE concentrations oscillating between <LOQ in the warm season up to 1 μg·L(-1) in the cold season. The large seasonal variation in ACE concentrations during wastewater treatment, compared to the other sweeteners (sucralose, cyclamate, and saccharin) and chloride enables its use as a transient tracer of wastewater inflows and riverbank filtration. In addition, the arrival time of the ACE concentration peak can be used to estimate groundwater flow velocity and mixing ratios, thereby demonstrating its potential in the calibration of groundwater numerical models.

Marshall, R., et al. (2022). "Septic System Impacts on Source Water: Two Novel Field Tracer Experiments in Fractured Sedimentary Bedrock." Sustainability 14(4).
	Septic systems are a common contributor of contaminants to groundwater that have implications for source water protection, particularly in fractured sedimentary bedrock environments. Two 24-h tracer experiments were performed that applied (1) the dye Lissamine Flavine FF and (2) three artificial sweeteners (acesulfame, sucralose, and cyclamate) in the leaching bed to examine solute transport from a single-family septic bed to a multilevel monitoring well installed in fractured sedimentary bedrock on a First Nation reserve in Southern Ontario, Canada. Tracer was first observed 3 h and 20 min after deployment, and breakthrough curves showed that multiple pathways likely exist between the septic bed and the monitoring well. Cyclamate concentrations were more elevated than expected compared to other studies that examined cyclamate's attenuation in the laboratory and in porous media aquifers. Solute transport through the septic bed was analyzed with the numerical modeling software Hydrus 1D, which indicated that the septic bed may be too thin, located directly on bedrock, underlain by fractured soils, or bypassed through a short-circuit. The rapid transport of septic leachate to fractured sedimentary aquifers is problematic for First Nation and rural communities. More stringent regulations are needed for the design and use of septic systems in these environments.

Mateo-Fernández, M., et al. (2022). "Toxicological and Nutraceutical Screening Assays of Some Artificial Sweeteners." Processes 10(2).
	Artificial sweeteners are food additives worldwide used instead of fructose or glucose in many diet beverages. Furthermore, diet beverages intake has been increasing every year. Thus, some food agencies should regulate it based on toxicological studies. Debates and controversial results are demonstrated, and authority can revise its decision on the basis of new data reporting toxicological effects since cyclamate has been forbidden in some countries. Therefore, the aim of this study was to report new data about the toxicity of acesulfame-k, aspartame, and cyclamate, which are useful for authority agencies, determining the toxic potential and nutraceutical capabilities of these compounds. The toxicity, antitoxicity, genotoxicity, antigenotoxicity, and life expectancy assays were carried out in Drosophila as an in vivo model. In addition, in vitro HL-60 line cell was used to evaluate the chemopreventive activity determining the cytotoxic effect and the capability of producing DNA damage due to internucleosomal fragmentation or DNA strand breaks. Furthermore, the methylated status of these cancer cells treated with the tested compounds was assayed as a cancer therapy. Our results demonstrated that all tested compounds were neither toxic nor genotoxic, whereas these compounds resulted in antigenotoxic and cytotoxic substances, except for cyclamate. Aspartame showed antitoxic effects in Drosophila. All tested compounds decreased the quality of life of this in vivo organism model. Acesulfame-k, aspartame, and cyclamate induced DNA damage in the HL-60 cell line in the comet assay, and acesulfame-k generally increased the methylation status. In conclusion, all tested artificial sweeteners were safe compounds at assayed concentrations since toxicity and genotoxicity were not significantly induced in flies. Moreover, Aspartame and Cyclamate showed protective activity against a genotoxin in Drosophila Regarding nutraceutical potential, acesulfame-k and aspartame could be demonstrated to be chemopreventive due to the cytotoxicity activity shown by these compounds. According to DNA fragmentation and comet assays, a necrotic way could be the main mechanism of death cells induced by acesulfame-k and aspartame. Finally, Acesulfame-K hypermethylated repetitive elements, which are hypomethylated in cancer cells resulting in a benefit to humans.

Monetti, J., et al. (2022). "Urea hydrolysis and long-term storage of source-separated urine for reuse as fertiliser is insufficient for the removal of anthropogenic micropollutants." Water Res. 222: 118891.
	Human and animal source-separated urine, stored and allowed to naturally hydrolyze (the bio-catalyzed transformation of urea to ammonia and bicarbonate), has been used for millennia as a fertiliser in agriculture. In a context of growing water scarcity and climate uncertainty, source-separation of urine is facing a strong revival thanks to the emergence of cost-effective waterless collection systems. Concomitantly, urine source-separation can be used as a method for nutrient recovery and subsequent reuse. In its simplest form, such recovery consists of collection followed by urea hydrolysis and storage as sole treatment. Numerous guidelines, including by the World Health Organization, consider that this is sufficient to stabilize the nutrients and inactivate any potential pathogens in the urine. However, it is still unclear whether said urine is effectively free from other compounds of concern, such as anthropogenic micropollutants with known toxicol. effects. Moreover, it is also currently unknown if the metabolites produced by human consumption of these products behave in similar way during short- and long-term storage i.e. whether any changes in chem. structure mean that these could be sorbed and/or precipitated in a different way, or if they can potentially be degraded by the biomass inherently present in urine collection systems. Finally, there is currently no knowledge of whether the observed concentrations of micropollutants in stored hydrolyzed urine could potentially have toxicol. effects if/when applied to soils and edible crops. To fill these research gaps, 20 commonly consumed compounds were selected in this study and their concentrations in the liquid and solid phases studied in the short- and long-term (up to ≥ 2 years). During the initial process of urea hydrolysis (≤ 5 days), ethyl-glucuronide was the sole compound effectively removed (by deconjugation), while only two other compounds, erythromycin and its metabolite, saw a reduction in their concentration (likely due to biomass sorption). Subsequently, during early storage (≤ 15 days), only three addnl. compounds were removed: paracetamol (> 99%), acesulfame (11.5%) and carbamazepine-10,11 epoxide (40.7%). Finally, long-term storage of up to 24 mo did not result in any further significant removal for any of the measured compounds, indicating that the procedure of hydrolysis + storage is not effective for the removal of anthropogenic micropollutants. The results of this investigation raise strong concerns about the direct reuse of hydrolyzed/stored human source-separated urine, and evidence the need for post-processing before implementation as fertiliser into edible crops due to the inherent toxicol. risk, particularly to infants.

Musatadi, M., et al. (2026). "Extending the chemical space in human urine by target and suspect screening of persistent and mobile organic compounds." Environ Pollut 388: 127359.
	Human exposure to persistent and mobile organic compounds (PMOCs) remains understudied due to analytical challenges. This study analysed 150 urine samples from a university community using a "dilute-and-shoot" approach followed by mixed-mode liquid chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry. Target analysis revealed 7 PMOCs with quantification frequencies above 70 %, including sweeteners aspartame (99 %) and saccharin (85 %), while cyclamate exhibited the highest concentrations (GM: 1782 ng/mL) despite lower detection frequency (21 %). Risk assessment indicated no health concerns for sweeteners; however, 17 % of participants showed potential risks from N-desmethyl-acetamiprid, a neonicotinoid metabolite. Among industrial chemicals, toluene-4-sulfonamide was highly prevalent (>90 %) and showed indications of potential risk in 24 % of cases, though this compound was only semi-validated. Multiple linear regression (MLR) confirmed univariate findings, such as elevated aspartame levels in students, and additionally uncovered additional associations. Notably, alcohol consumption, caffeine intake, and personal care product use were positively linked to increased industrial PMOC concentrations, highlighting complex exposure determinants shaped by lifestyle factors. Suspect screening annotated 60 additional compounds, predominantly industrial chemicals, including intermediates and fragrance components, and 7 were confirmed by analytical standards. Caffeine was detected in 79 % of samples, with older participants exhibiting higher exposure, while younger participants showed elevated levels of some fragrances. Moreover, negative associations of caffeine with smoking and plastic use, and positive associations of aniline with caffeine intake were elucidated. Overall, the integration of targeted and non-targeted screening with MLR modelling elucidated intricate exposure patterns influenced by demographic and behavioural factors, significantly advancing the characterization of the polar spectrum of the human exposome.

Nicoluci, I. G., et al. (2022). "HIGH-INTENSITY SWEETENERS: TRENDS OF USE IN FOODS AND ADVANCES IN ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES." Quimica Nova 45(2): 207-217.
	The high consumption of sugar by the population and its correlation with the increase in the rates of obesity and chronic non-communicable diseases have promoted discussions of strategies to reduce the intake of this ingredient. In addition to consumer campaigns and governmental public policies, the use of high-intensity sweeteners to replace sugar in foods could be a feasible alternative for reducing sugar intake. However, it is important that high-intensity sweeteners be used considering the maximum permitted levels and approved food categories according to the current legislation. In this context, the development and application of analytical methods to determine high-intensity sweeteners in foods is a current and relevant issue. This manuscript aims to review the general aspects and available analytical techniques for the determination of these additives in food matrices.

Nikolenko, O., et al. (2024). "Combination of multivariate data analysis and mixing modelling to assess tracer potential of contaminants of emerging concern in aquifers." Environ. Pollut. (Oxford, U. K.) 341: 123020.
	Collected evidence has shown that contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) in conjunction with more conventional tracers (major ions, nutrients, isotopes, etc.) can be used to trace pollution origin in aquatic systems. However, in highly mixed aquifer systems signals obtained from conventional tracers overlap diminishing their potential to be used as tracers. In this study, we present an approach that incorporates multivariate statistical anal. (principal component anal. (PCA) and Kohonen's Self-Organizing Map method (SOM)) and mixing modeling to identify the most suitable CECs to be employed as anthropogenic tracers. The study area is located in the Besos River Delta (Barcelona, NE Spain) and represents the highly mixed aquifer system. A one-year monthly based monitoring campaign was performed to collect the information about the concentrations of 105 CECs as well as major and minor ions in the river and along the groundwater flow. The dimensionality of the obtained dataset was reduced to 25 CECs, based on their estimated health risk effects, for multivariate data anal. The obtained results showed the overlap of conventional tracers' signals obtained from PCA. In case of CECs, PCA revealed differences in their distributions allowing the differentiation of the roles of natural attenuation processes, local and regional flows on their occurrence in different parts of the aquifer. This was not possible to do using solely CECs' distribution profiles. SOMs provided the lacking information about the modality of the distribution of each CECs, revealing their ability to represent factors controlling the groundwater hydrochem., which assist in defining their tracer potential. Based on the obtained results four identified persistent CECs, two with unimodal (lamotrigine and 5-Desamino-5-oxo-lamotrigine) and two with bimodal (carbamazepine and diazepam (higher modality was not revealed)) distributions, were selected to run a mixing model to compare their tracer performance.

Ning, Y., et al. (2023). "The alteration of urinary metabolomics profiles in Kashin-Beck disease in a three consecutive year study." Mol. Omics 19(2): 137-149.
	Kashin-Beck disease (KBD) is a serious, endemic chronic osteochondral disease characterized by sym. enlargement of the phalanges, brachydactyly, joint deformity, and even dwarfism. To investigate the urinary metabolomic profiles of KBD patients, we performed an untargeted metabolomics approach using liquid chromatog. coupled with mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Adult urinary specimens were collected from 39 patients with KBD and 19 healthy subjects; the children′s urinary specimens were collected from 5 patients with KBD, 25 suspected KBD cases and 123 healthy subjects in the KBD endemic area during a three consecutive year study. We identified 10 upregulated and 28 downregulated secondary level metabolites highly associated with etiol. and pathogenesis of KBD between adult KBD and adult controls. A total of 163, 967 and 795 metabolites were significantly different in the urine among children with KBD, suspected children with KBD cases and healthy child controls, resp., for each year in three consecutive years. HT-2 toxin, Se-adenosylselenomethionine (AdoSeMet), the toxin T2 tetrol, and many kinds of amino acids were identified as differential metabolites in this study. Amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, fructose and mannose metabolism, arachidonic acid metabolism, D-glutamine and D-glutamate metabolism, ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinone biosynthesis, and D-glutamine and D-glutamate metabolism were perturbed pathways in adult and child KBD patients. Our study provides new insight into the underlying mechanisms of KBD, and suggests that we should pay more attention to these differences in small-mol. metabolites and metabolic pathways in the environmental etiol. and pathogenesis of KBD.

Ore, A., et al. (2025). "Removal, transport, and transformation of organic micropollutants in managed aquifer recharge: Insights from target and non-target analyses." Water Res. 287(Part_B): 124409.
	Managed aquifer recharge (MAR) systems can reduce the stress on groundwater resources by intentionally infiltrating and abstracting (surface) water for drinking water production Organic micropollutant (OMP) removal and transformation products (TPs) formation in MAR depend on several factors, including their sorption and biodegradation potential. Via target and non-target analyses, we monitored OMPs (parent compounds + TPs) from infiltrated water to abstracted groundwater and drinking water. Our results show that MAR improves water quality, with 61% of the 31 OMPs in the infiltrated water being removed by >90%. However, persistent contaminants, including artificial sweeteners and PFAS, were not removed and reached drinking water. The charge state of hydrophilic OMPs determined transport, which was driven by electrostatic interactions with soil: pos. charged OMPs were retained near the infiltration point, while neg. charged OMPs travelled to the groundwater abstraction wells. Our results reveal important blind spots in the standard list of priority OMPs measured to assess drinking water quality. Specifically, non-target anal. revealed 50% more OMPs than those detected using target anal., and uncovered many overlooked TPs. 46 TPs were detected in groundwater but were absent in infiltrated water, indicating possible OMP biodegradation in MAR. However, 28 possibly persistent TPs were also detected in the MAR system. Therefore, post-treatment technologies targeting persistent and mobile contaminants should be applied to complement MAR at the drinking water treatment plant. Our findings can contribute to optimizing MAR systems for improved OMP removal and highlight the need for a more comprehensive approach to water quality assessment for cleaner drinking water production

Pereira, C. G., et al. (2024). "Dietary exposure to high-intensity sweeteners by the Brazilian self-declared diabetic population and general Brazilian population." Food Chem Toxicol 194: 115105.
	Due to an increasing use of high-intensity sweeteners in foods and potential health implications of high levels exposure, the intake of high-intensity sweeteners present in the diet of the Brazilian population and the self-declared diabetic population, based on national consumption data from the 2017-2018 Family Budget Survey (POF), was estimated. The occurrence of the high-intensity sweeteners was established by labeling foods obtained in physical stores and online, in two scenarios: average and maximum concentration. Food consumption data were derived for the self-declared diabetic Brazilian population and the Brazilian population for average consumers and consumers only, stratified by: sex, age, habitation, and regions from Brazil. For consumers only of the general Brazilian population, the intake of sodium cyclamate, steviol glycosides, and sucralose exceeded the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI), mainly in adolescents (131.3%, 117.2, 123.0% of respective ADI). The estimated intake for the diabetic population was below ADI in all scenarios calculated. The most exposed diabetic population to sodium cyclamate and sucralose were female (69.6% and 59.4% of respective ADI) and the elderly (79.2% and 70.1% of respective ADI). The Brazilian population, mainly high consumers, was more exposed to high-intensity sweeteners than the self-declared diabetic population.

Pierini, G. D., et al. (2013). "Simultaneous determination of acesulfame-K and aspartame using linear sweep voltammetry and multivariate calibration." Microchemical Journal 106: 347-350.
	A simple and rapid method to determine acesulfame-K and aspartame simultaneously in power sweeteners. without pretreatment was proposed. This method employs linear sweep voltammetry assisted with multivariate calibration tools, in order to resolve the overlapping signals of both analytes. Multivariate calibration models were made using a Partial Last Square (PLS) algorithm. In order to increase sensitivity a rotating disk electrode (RDE) at 8000 rpm was used. The sample throughput was 90 samples h(-1). The obtained results are in good agreement with that obtained with HPLC method. This paper proposed an alternative methodology for improving the quality control of power sweeteners. (C) 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Potarniche, I. A., et al. (2023). "Classification of Food Additives Using UV Spectroscopy and One-Dimensional Convolutional Neural Network." Sensors 23(17).
	Food additives are utilized in countless food products available for sale. They enhance or obtain a specific flavor, extend the storage time, or obtain a desired texture. This paper presents an automatic classification system for five food additives based on their absorbance in the ultraviolet domain. Solutions with different concentrations were created by dissolving a measured additive mass into distilled water. The analyzed samples were either simple (one additive solution) or mixed (two additive solutions). The substances presented absorbance peaks between 190 nm and 360 nm. Each substance presents a certain number of absorbance peaks at specific wavelengths (e.g., acesulfame potassium presents an absorbance peak at 226 nm, whereas the peak associated with potassium sorbate is at 254 nm). Therefore, each additive has a distinctive spectrum that can be used for classification. The sample classification was performed using deep learning techniques. The samples were associated with numerical labels and divided into three datasets (training, validation, and testing). The best classification results were obtained using CNN (convolutional neural network) models. The classification of the 404 spectra with a CNN model with three convolutional layers obtained a mean testing accuracy of 92.38% & PLUSMN; 1.48%, whereas the mean validation accuracy was 93.43% & PLUSMN; 2.01%.

Prader, S., et al. (2010). "Recurrent transient renal Fanconi syndrome: Adverse effect of the artificial sweetener cyclamate." Swiss Medical Weekly 140(21-22): 14S-14S.
	
Qiao, S., et al. (2024). "Acesulfame and other artificial sweeteners in a wastewater treatment plant in Alberta, Canada: Occurrence, degradation, and emission." Chemosphere 356: 141893.
	Acesulfame (ACE), sucralose (SUC), cyclamate (CYC), and saccharin (SAC) are widely used artificial sweeteners that undergo negligible metabolism in the human body, and thus ubiquitously exist in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). Due to their persistence in WWTPs, ACE and SUC are found in natural waters globally. Wastewater samples were collected from the primary influent, primary effluent, secondary effluent, and final effluent of a WWTP in Alberta, Canada between August 2022 and February 2023, and the artificial sweeteners concentrations were measured by LC-MS/MS. Using wastewater-based epidemiology, the daily per capita consumption of ACE in the studied wastewater treatment plant catchment was estimated to be the highest in the world. Similar to other studies, the removal efficiency in WWTP was high for SAC and CYC, but low or even negative for SUC. However, ACE removal remained surprisingly high (>96%), even in the cold Canadian winter months. This result may indicate a further adaptation of microorganisms capable of biodegrading ACE in WWTP. The estimated per capita discharge into the environment of ACE, CYC, and SAC is low in Alberta due to the prevalent utilization of secondary treatment throughout the province, but is 17.4-18.8 times higher in Canada, since only 70.3% of total discharged wastewater in Canada undergoes secondary treatment.

Raben, A., et al. (2002). "Sucrose compared with artificial sweeteners: different effects on ad libitum food intake and body weight after 10 wk of supplementation in overweight subjects." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 76(4): 721-729.
	Background: The role of artificial sweeteners in body-weight regulation is still unclear.Objective: We investigated the effect of long-term supplementation with drinks and foods containing either sucrose or artificial sweeteners on ad libitum food intake and body weight in overweight subjects.Design: For 10 wk, overweight men and women consumed daily supplements of either sucrose [n = 21, body mass index (BMI; in kg/m(2)) = 28.0] or artificial sweeteners (n = 20, BMI = 27.6). On average, sucrose supplements provided 3.4 MJ and 152 g sucrose/d and sweetener supplements provided 1.0 MJ and 0 g sucrose/d.Results: After 10 wk, the sucrose group had increases in total energy (by 1.6 MJ/d), sucrose (to 28% of energy), and carbohydrate intakes and decreases in fat and protein intakes. The sweetener group had small but significant decreases in sucrose intake and energy density. Body weight and fat mass increased in the sucrose group (by 1.6 and 1.3 kg, respectively) and decreased in the sweetener group (by 1.0 and 0.3 kg, respectively) the between-group differences were significant at P < 0.001 (body weight) and P < 0.01 (fat mass). Systolic and diastolic blood pressure increased in the sucrose group (by 3.8 and 4.1 mm Hg, respectively) and decreased in the sweetener group (by 3.1 and 1.2 mm Hg, respectively).Conclusions: Overweight subjects who consumed fairly large amounts of sucrose (28% of energy), mostly as beverages, had increased energy intake, body weight, fat mass, and blood pressure after 10 wk. These effects were not observed in a similar group of subjects who consumed artificial sweeteners.

Ramos, E., et al. (2022). "Assessment of Artificial Sweeteners as Wastewater Co-Tracers in an Urban Groundwater System of Mexico (Monterrey Metropolitan Area)." Water 14(20).
	Contamination from wastewater infiltration, typically from leaky sewers, poses a threat to urban groundwater resources. Artificial sweeteners (Asws), used as sucrose substitutes in many products of daily consumption, are released into groundwater systems and may be used as tracers of wastewater in urban groundwater environments, because most of these compounds are discharged directly into sewer systems. Here, for the first time, we investigated the occurrence of Asws in an urban groundwater system in Mexico. Artificial sweetener concentrations of acesulfame (ACE), aspartame (ASP), cyclamate (CYC), saccharin (SAC), and sucralose (SUC) were tested in 42 production wells in the Monterrey Metropolitan Area (MMA). The detection frequencies of quantified Asws observations were in the order ACE (57%) > SUC (54%) > SAC (7%), with SUC being the most abundant Asws, with concentrations below the quantification limit (BQL) of 2.9 mu g/L, followed by ACE (BQL 0.73 mu g/L) and SAC (BQL 1.4 mu g/L). ASP and CYC were not detected at any sampling site. Considerable Asws ingestion amongst the MMA population is the main input source of Asws into the city's wastewater network, percolating into the urban groundwater system due to leaky sewers. Our work shows that the application of Asws as wastewater tracers (SUC and ACE) effectively determines wastewater sources affecting urban groundwater.

Rangan, C. and D. G. Barceloux (2009). "Food additives and sensitivities." Dis Mon 55(5): 292-311.
	
Ren, B. R., et al. Study on the determination of sodium cyclamate in the jelly, Shenyang, PEOPLES R CHINA.
	Objective: In order to study the contect of sodium cyclamate in jellies. Method: Using ring amino sulfonate sodium hypochlorite derived reaction occurs under acidic conditions to generate N-,N-dichloro-cyclohexane, and then hexane extracted ODC-C14 column, methanol(V):water(V)=80:20 as mobile phase separation, the flow rate was 1.0mL/min, the injection volume was 20ul, the detection wavelength of 314nm. Result This high-efficiency liquid chromatography determination of the concentration of sodium cyclamate in the linear relationship between the 0-300ug/ml, the correlation coefficient was 0.9995 above, and require accuracy and good reproducibility. The recovery rate of sodium cyclamate was 80%-120%, the coefficient of variation less than 10%. Conclusion: The method is rapid, simple, highly sensitive and with less interference, which is suitable for the detection of cyclamate in jellies.

Ródenas-Torralba, E., et al. (2007). "Micropumping multicommutation turbidimetric analysis of waters." Talanta 73(4): 742-747.
	A micropumping multicommutation manifold to perform turbidity determinations in waters is described. The procedure is based on the use of a combination of hydrazine sulfate and hexamethylenetetramine, to obtain an external standard of nephelometric turbidity units (NTU), which could compare the absorbance measurements at high wavelengths for samples with a calibration line obtained from a concentrated formazine standard diluted on-line. To minimize sample and reagent consumption and waste generation, the flow system was designed with two solenoid micro-pumps, one of them for the alternative introduction of the formazine standard and samples and the other one for the water carrier. The multicommutation approach makes possible the on-line dilution of a single standard to obtain the external calibration. The linear response was ranged up to 160 NTU. The coefficient of variation was estimated as 1.6 and 3.2% for 10 and 100 turn flow cell, respectively, for solutions containing 40 NTU (n = 10). Approximately, 60 determinations can be carried out per hour with limit of detection values of 1 and 0.1 NTU, consuming only 160 or 240 mu L formazine solution and generating 1.8 or 2.0 mL waste per determination, using measurement cells of 10 and 100 mm optical pathlength, respectively. The procedure was successfully applied to 11 different water samples. Recovery studies were carried out and results obtained were between 97.5 +/- 0.2 and 100 +/- 1%. The development of a homebuilt light emitting diode (LED)-based portable flow analysis instrument was checked for in situ turbidimetric measurements, providing this equipment a LOD value of 0.09 NTU working with a blue LED at 464 run and a LOD value of 0.1 NTU working with an IR LED. (c) 2007 Elsevier B.V.. All rights reserved.

Rong, S. F., et al. (2025). "Optimization and validation of an analytical method for the determination of fifteen sweeteners in diabetic foods by HPLC-MS/MS." Microchemical Journal 209.
	In this study, a high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) method was developed to determine 7 natural sweeteners and 8 artificial sweeteners in diabetic foods. Sweeteners in sugar- free yogurt products underwent a series of pretreatment procedures including extraction, deproteinization, degreasing, and purification using C 18 SPE cartridges before being analyzed by mass spectrometry in multiple reaction monitoring mode. To mitigate matrix effects, separate standard curves were established for juice and yogurt matrices. The method was validated with linearity, precision, sensitivity, and recovery. For juice sample, the limits of detection (LODs) ranged from 0.23 to 72.71 mu g/L and the limits of quantification (LOQs) were between 0.76 and 242.35 mu g/L. For yogurt sample, the LODs ranged from 0.34 to 98.10 mu g/L and LOQs were between 1.13 and 326.98 mu g/L. The average addition standard recoveries of 15 sweeteners were 92.07-108.8 % in sugar-free orange juice and 83.60-108.2 % in sugar-free yogurt, with intra-day and inter-day relative standard deviations less than 5.0 %. The validated method was applied to 10 diabetic foods samples and 7 sweeteners were detected, ranging from 0.004-5.65 mg/g, all below their respective maximum permitted levels, providing an effective tool for the monitoring of sweeteners in diabetic foods.

Santana, N. D., et al. (2022). "Thermal and rheological study of artificial and natural powder tabletop sweeteners." Food Research International 162.
	Tabletop sweeteners play an essential role in calorie-restricted and low-sugar diets. Thus, this work aims to characterize by thermal analysis, SEM, and rheology, powder tabletop sweeteners samples based on the most currently consumed: aspartame (A1), saccharin (C1), sucralose (U1), stevia extract (E2) and monk fruit extract (M1). Their physicochemical properties were compared regarding thermal stability, morphology, and visco-elastic behavior. Samples based on artificial sweeteners started to lose mass from 65 degrees C. On the other hand, natural sweeteners showed greater thermal stability with an initial decomposition temperature of 170 degrees C. The DSC curves of A1 and C1 samples exhibited similar thermal profiles showing dextrose melting at 150 degrees C. Both DSC analyses of samples based on natural sweeteners revealed Tm erythritol (121 degrees C) followed by its decom-position (288 degrees C). In rheological analysis, except for the U1 sample, all the others presented a slight increase in the storage modulus at 10 and 25 degrees C, indicating that their granules were not wholly deformed. This aspect could influence the aftertaste of the products in which they will be used.

Santini, A. O., et al. (2008). "Development of a potentiometric sensor for the determination of saccharin in instant tea powders, diet soft drinks and strawberry dietetic jam." Microchemical Journal 90(2): 124-128.
	The construction and the analytical evaluation of a potentiometric sensor, namely, Pt vertical bar Hg vertical bar Hg-2(Sac)2 vertical bar Graphite, where Sac stands for saccharinate ion, are described. This electrode has a wide linear dynamic range between 5.0 x 10(-7) and 1.0 X 10(-2) mol L-1 with a near-Nernstian slope of -58.1 +/- 1.1 mV decade(-1) and a detection limit of 3.9 x 10(-7) mol L-1. The potentiometric response is independent of the pH of the solution in the pH range 3.0-9.0. The electrode is easily constructed at a relatively low-cost with fast response time (within 10-30 s) and can be used for a period of 10 months without significant change in its performance characteristics. The proposed sensor displayed good selectivities over a variety of other anions (carboxylates and inorganic anions). The potentiometric sensor was successfully applied to the determination of saccharin in real food samples, that is, in instant tea powders, diet soft drinks and strawberry dietetic jam. (c) 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Scheurer, M., et al. (2014). Transformation Products of Artificial Sweeteners. 978-1-118-33959-6, 978-1-118-33955-8: 525-544.
	
Schoeffner, D. J. and U. P. Thorgeirsson (2000). "Susceptibility of nonhuman primates to carcinogens of human relevance." In Vivo 14(1): 149-156.
	Nonhuman primates are a valuable experimental model for the evaluation of human carcinogenic risk but have not been widely used for various reasons, such as high cost and lack of availability. The present review discusses the findings from a long-term carcinogenesis study in nonhuman primates that was carried out under contract by the National Cancer Institute from 1961 to 1997. Among the classes of compounds investigated were model rodent carcinogens, food additives, food and environmental contaminants, heterocyclic amines, N-nitroso compounds, and antineoplastic and immunosuppressives. Of the model rodent carcinogens tested, only urethane was carcinogenic in monkeys. Long-term administration of saccharin or cyclamate did not result in toxicity or carcinogenicity in nonhuman primates, which is commonly seen in rodent models. Similar to rodent models and suspected in the human population, the fungal toxins, aflatoxin B1 and sterimatocystin, induced malignant liver tumors in monkeys. Relatively few animals administered DDT developed malignant tumors, however, hepatic and CNS toxicity was commonly observed. Hepatocellular carcinoma developed in a majority of monkeys administered the heterocyclic amine, IQ but not the structurally similar MeIQx. Resultant toxicity and carcinogenicity from N-nitroso compounds was variable. While diethylnitrosamine proved to be the most potent hepatocarcinogen tested, no malignant tumors were seen in animals administered N-methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoquanidine. Susceptibility of nonhuman primates to chemotherapeutic agents was also variable. Only procarbazine and N-methyl-N-nitrosourea were highly carcinogenic, whereas few tumors were seen as a result of cyclophosphamide, Adriamycin, melphalan, or azathioprine.

Seller, C., et al. (2023). P-Ident2 - persistence assessment in surface waters - addressing uncertainties in OECD 309 and OECD 308 studies, Umweltbundesamt: 1-251.
	The project P-Ident 2 aims (i) for a better understanding of the transformation behavior/persistence of chems. in surface waters, and (ii) to address uncertainties in (regulatory) persistence assessment. Therefore, existing laboratory test methods (OECD 308 and 309) and evaluation methods were modified and further evaluated. Alongside, the transformation behavior/persistence of chems. in a real surface water body (Rhine) was quantified based on field measurements and modeling. The outcomes of the laboratory biotransformation tests, as well as the results compiled by the model framework describing compound transformation in the Rhine river catchment allow for a comparison of a chem.'s transformation behavior in laboratory studies and a real surface water.

Seller, C., et al. (2023). "Do biotransformation data from laboratory experiments reflect micropollutant degradation in a large river basin." Water Res. 235: 119908.
	Identifying a chem.'s potential for biotransformation in the aquatic environment is crucial to predict its fate and manage its potential hazards. Due to the complexity of natural water bodies, especially river networks, biotransformation is often studied in laboratory experiments, assuming that study outcomes can be extrapolated to compound behavior in the field. Here, we investigated to what extent outcomes of laboratory simulation studies indeed reflect biotransformation kinetics observed in riverine systems. To determine in-field biotransformation, we measured loads of 27 wastewater treatment plant effluent-borne compounds along the Rhine and its major tributaries during two seasons. Up to 21 compounds were detected at each sampling location. Measured compound loads were used in an inverse model framework of the Rhine river basin to derive k'bio,field values - a compound-specific parameter describing the compoundsaverage biotransformation potential during the field studies. To support model calibration, we performed phototransformation and sorption experiments with all the study compounds, identifying 5 compounds that are susceptible towards direct phototransformation and determining Koc values covering four orders of magnitude. On the laboratory side, we used a similar inverse model framework to derive k'bio,lab values from water-sediment experiments run according to a modified OECD 308-type protocol. The comparison of k'bio,lab and k'bio,field revealed that their absolute values differed, pointing towards faster transformation in the Rhine river basin. Yet, we could demonstrate that relative rankings of biotransformation potential and groups of compounds with low, moderate and high persistence agree reasonably well between laboratory and field outcomes. Overall, our results provide evidence that laboratory-based biotransformation studies using the modified OECD 308 protocol and k'bio values derived thereof bear considerable potential to reflect biotransformation of micropollutants in one of the largest European river basins.

Shah, R. and L. S. e Jager (2017). Recent Analytical Methods for the Analysis of Sweeteners in Food: A Regulatory Perspective. 978-1-119-16055-7, 978-1-119-16058-8: 13-32.
	Non-nutritive or low calorie sweeteners are commonly used worldwide in the food industry, often in combination in order to limit undesirable tastes. The list of allowable sweeteners varies among countries and it is important for regulatory agencies and food safely laboratories to monitor these highly consumed products to ensure compliance with worldwide regulations. Current analytical methods for confirmation and quantification of sweeteners must allow for confirmation olanalyte identity in order to be compatible with today's standards. Various methods for the determination of non-nutritive sweeteners have been reported in the literature. The most common multi-sweetener methods involve high performance liquid chromatography (I IPLC) with different types of detection. The modern technique of IIPLC-MS/MS is the current method of choice for the determination and confirmation of sweeteners in foods. In addition to multi-sweetener analyses there is also a need for single sweetener analytical methods in certain circumstances.

Sharma, A., et al. (2015). "Environmental and anthropogenic carcinogens and their carcinogenic effects on humans." J. Biomed. Pharm. Res. 4(2): 1-13.
	The review describes the environmental and anthropogenic carcinogens and their carcinogenicity. Environmental and anthropogenic carcinogens can be chems. (exposed from chem. industries, alc. beverages, welding and wood dust, etc.), radiations (UV-rays, X-rays, γ-rays, radon, neutron, thorium, etc.), microbiol. agents (viruses and bacterial infections), and natural products (tobacco, nicotine, areca nut, yerba mate, safrole, cycasin, etc.). Diet related factors (heterocyclic amines, saccharine, cyclamate, etc.) are through to account for about 30-35% of cancers in developing and developed countries. Obesity may raise incidence of cancer in the oesophagus, breast, colorectum, endometrium, and kidney.

Skurk, T., et al. (2023). "Sweetener System Intervention Shifted Neutrophils from Homeostasis to Priming." Nutrients 15(5).
	BACKGROUND: Non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) are part of personalized nutrition strategies supporting healthy glycemic control. In contrast, the consumption of non-nutritive sweeteners has been related to person-specific and microbiome-dependent glycemic impairments. Reports on the effects of NNS on our highly individual cellular immune system are sparse. The recent identification of taste receptor expression in a variety of immune cells, however, suggested their immune-modulatory relevance. METHODS: We studied the influence of a beverage-typical NNS system on the transcriptional profiling of sweetener-cognate taste receptors, selected cytokines and their receptors, and on Ca(2+) signaling in isolated blood neutrophils. We determined plasma concentrations of saccharin, acesulfame-K, and cyclamate by HPLC-MS/MS, upon ingestion of a soft drink-typical sweetener surrogate. In an open-labeled, randomized intervention study, we determined pre- versus post-intervention transcript levels by RT-qPCR of sweetener-cognate taste receptors and immune factors. RESULTS: Here we show that the consumption of a food-typical sweetener system modulated the gene expression of cognate taste receptors and induced the transcriptional regulation signatures of early homeostasis- and late receptor/signaling- and inflammation-related genes in blood neutrophils, shifting their transcriptional profile from homeostasis to priming. Notably, sweeteners at postprandial plasma concentrations facilitated fMLF (N-formyl-Met-Leu-Phe)-induced Ca(2+) signaling. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the notion of sweeteners priming neutrophils to higher alertness towards their adequate stimuli.

Smolinski, J., et al. (2023). "Peroxymonosulfate-assisted photocatalytic degradation of artificial sweeteners in water." Chemical and Process Engineering-New Frontiers 44(3).
	In the present study, peroxymonosulfate (PMS) activation was proposed for efficient photocatalytic degradation of aspartame, acesulfame, saccharin, and cyclamate - artificial sweeteners frequently present in wastewaters and surface waters worldwide. TiO2 nanosheets with exposed {0 0 1} facets were synthesised using the fluorine-free lyophilisation technique as a green concept for the synthesis and used for the photodegradation of selected sweeteners not susceptible to biodegradation. The synergetic effect of photocatalysis with the sulfate radical-based process was for the first time investigated. It was found that the studied artificial sweeteners were practically not susceptible to photolysis within 60 minutes of irradiation. In the presence of 2D titanium (IV) oxide, the artificial sweeteners were degraded entirely in less than 30 min, whereas the addition of peroxymonosulfate resulted in complete degradation after 10-15 minutes of the process.

Stampe, S., et al. (2022). "Artificial Sweeteners in Breast Milk: A Clinical Investigation with a Kinetic Perspective." Nutrients 14(13).
	Artificial sweeteners (ASs) are calorie-free chemical substances used instead of sugar to sweeten foods and drinks. Pregnant women with obesity or diabetes are often recommended to substitute sugary products with ASs to prevent an increase in body weight. However, some recent controversy surrounding ASs relates to concerns about the risk of obesity caused by a variety of metabolic changes, both in the mother and the offspring. This study addressed these concerns and investigated the biodistribution of ASs in plasma and breast milk of lactating women to clarify whether ASs can transfer from mother to offspring through breast milk. We recruited 49 lactating women who were provided with a beverage containing four different ASs (acesulfame-potassium, saccharin, cyclamate, and sucralose). Blood and breast milk samples were collected before and up to six hours after consumption. The women were categorized: BMI < 25 (n = 20), BMI > 27 (n = 21) and type 1 diabetes (n = 8). We found that all four ASs were present in maternal plasma and breast milk. The time-to-peak was 30−120 min in plasma and 240−300 min in breast milk. Area under the curve (AUC) ratios in breast milk were 88.9% for acesulfame-potassium, 38.9% for saccharin, and 1.9% for cyclamate. We observed no differences in ASs distributions between the groups.

Sun, Z., et al. (2023). "Integrated proteomic and metabolomic analysis of plasma reveals regulatory pathways and key elements in thyroid cancer." Mol. Omics 19(10): 800-809.
	Thyroid cancer (TC) is the most common endocrine malignancy with increasing incidence in recent years. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB), as a gold standard for the initial evaluation of thyroid nodules, fails to cover all the cytopathol. conditions resulting in overdiagnosis. There is an urgent need for a better classification of thyroid cancer from benign thyroid nodules (BTNs). Here, data independent acquisition (DIA)-based proteomics and untargeted metabolomics in plasma samples of 10 patients with TC and 15 patients with BTNs were performed. Key proteins and metabolites were identified specific to TC, and an independent cohort was used to validate the potential biomarkers using ELISA (ELISA). In total, 1429 proteins and 1172 metabolites were identified. Principal component anal. showed a strong overlap at the proteomic level and a significant discrimination at the metabolomic level between the two groups, indicating a more drastic disturbance in the metabolome of thyroid cancer. Integrated anal. of proteomics and metabolomics shows glycerophospholipid metabolism and arachidonic acid metabolism as key regulatory pathways. Furthermore, a multi-omics biomarker panel was developed consisting of LCAT, GPX3 and leukotriene B4. Based on the AUC value for the discovery set, the classification performance was 0.960. The AUC value of the external validation set was 0.930. Altogether, our results will contribute to the clin. application of potential biomarkers in the diagnosis of thyroid cancer.

Timmers, P. H. A., et al. (2022). "Improved drinking water quality after adding advanced oxidation for organic micropollutant removal to pretreatment of river water undergoing dune infiltration near The Hague, Netherlands." J. Hazard. Mater. 429: 128346.
	Introduction of AOP decreased the number and concentration of OMP that were introduced during MARR, which decreased the risk of neg. impacts on ecol. and groundwater. The many uncertainties, such as seasonal and annual fluctuations of the intake water and in the infltration ponds, made it diffcult to determine if factors were directly affected by the AOP introduction. However, AOP did increase the amount of easily biol. degradable compounds, but these were diluted with non-AOP treated infltration water and degraded during transport to the dunes, making the effects on MARR negligible. Several OMP that were not removed during AOP, were removed during MARR. The overall OMP concentrations in resulting drinking water therefore decreased after introduction of AOP, without showing a measurable neg. effect on other water quality parameters.

Voiculescu, D. I., et al. (2021). "COMPUTATIONAL ASSESSMENT OF THE PHARMACOKINETICS AND TOXICITY OF THE INTENSIVE SWEETENERS." Farmacia 69(6): 1032-1041.
	The present study focuses on predicting the pharmacokinetics and toxicological endpoints of the widely used intensive sweeteners for preventing and management of diabetes: acesulfame K, advantame, aspartame, cyclamates, glycyrrhizin, neohesperidin dihydrochalcone, neotame, saccharin, steviol, sucralose, and tagatose. Predictions obtained using several computational tools were generally in good agreement each other and with few known data concerning the effects of these compounds on humans. The possible side effects produced by these sweeteners are: h-ERG blocking potential (glycyrrhizin, neohesperidin dihydrochalcone, advantame), eye and skin injuries (acesulfame K, cyclamates, saccharine), hepatotoxicity (saccharine), nephrotoxicity (steviol, glycyrrhizin), hypotension (advantame), mutagenicity and genotoxic carcinogenicity (acesulfame K, sucralose).

Wilk, K., et al. (2022). "The Effect of Artificial Sweeteners Use on Sweet Taste Perception and Weight Loss Efficacy: A Review." Nutrients 14(6).
	Excessive consumption of sugar-rich foods is currently one of the most important factors that has led to the development of the global pandemic of obesity. On the other hand, there is evidence that obesity contributes to reduced sensitivity to sweet taste and hormonal changes affecting appetite, leading to an increased craving for sweets. A high intake of sugars increases the caloric value of the diet and, consequently, leads to weight gain. Moreover, attention is drawn to the concept of the addictive properties of sugar and sugary foods. A potential method to reduce the energy value of diet while maintaining the sweet taste is using non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS). NNS are commonly used as table sugar substitutes. This wide group of chemical compounds features high sweetness almost without calories due to its high sweetening strength. NNS include aspartame, acesulfame-K, sucralose, saccharin, cyclamate, neohesperidin dihydrochalcone (neohesperidin DC), neotame, taumatin, and advantame. The available evidence suggests that replacing sugar with NNS may support weight control. However, the effect of NNS on the regulation of appetite and sweet taste perception is not clear. Therefore, the review aimed to summarize the current knowledge about the use of NNS as a potential strategy for weight loss and their impact on sweet taste perception. Most studies have demonstrated that consumption of NNS-sweetened foods does not increase sweetness preference orenergy intake. Nonetheless, further research is required to determine the long-term effects of NNS on weight management.

Yebra-Biurrun, M. C. Determination of acesulfame-K, cyclamate, and saccharin, CRC Press.
	A discussion of the determination of acesulfame-K, cyclamate, and saccharin in food products.

Zhang, R., et al. (2023). "The Effect of Non-Nutritive Sweetened Beverages on Postprandial Glycemic and Endocrine Responses: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis." Nutrients 15(4).
	Background: There has been an emerging concern that non-nutritive sweeteners (NNS) can increase the risk of cardiometabolic disease. Much of the attention has focused on acute metabolic and endocrine responses to NNS. To examine whether these mechanisms are operational under real-world scenarios, we conducted a systematic review and network meta-analysis of acute trials comparing the effects of non-nutritive sweetened beverages (NNS beverages) with water and sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) in humans. Methods: MEDLINE, EMBASE, and The Cochrane Library were searched through to January 15, 2022. We included acute, single-exposure, randomized, and non-randomized, clinical trials in humans, regardless of health status. Three patterns of intake were examined: (1) uncoupling interventions, where NNS beverages were consumed alone without added energy or nutrients; (2) coupling interventions, where NNS beverages were consumed together with added energy and nutrients as carbohydrates; and (3) delayed coupling interventions, where NNS beverages were consumed as a preload prior to added energy and nutrients as carbohydrates. The primary outcome was a 2 h incremental area under the curve (iAUC) for blood glucose concentration. Secondary outcomes included 2 h iAUC for insulin, glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP), peptide YY (PYY), ghrelin, leptin, and glucagon concentrations. Network meta-analysis and confidence in the network meta-analysis (CINeMA) were conducted in R-studio and CINeMA, respectively. Results: Thirty-six trials involving 472 predominantly healthy participants were included. Trials examined a variety of single NNS (acesulfame potassium, aspartame, cyclamate, saccharin, stevia, and sucralose) and NNS blends (acesulfame potassium + aspartame, acesulfame potassium + sucralose, acesulfame potassium + aspartame + cyclamate, and acesulfame potassium + aspartame + sucralose), along with matched water/unsweetened controls and SSBs sweetened with various caloric sugars (glucose, sucrose, and fructose). In uncoupling interventions, NNS beverages (single or blends) had no effect on postprandial glucose, insulin, GLP-1, GIP, PYY, ghrelin, and glucagon responses similar to water controls (generally, low to moderate confidence), whereas SSBs sweetened with caloric sugars (glucose and sucrose) increased postprandial glucose, insulin, GLP-1, and GIP responses with no differences in postprandial ghrelin and glucagon responses (generally, low to moderate confidence). In coupling and delayed coupling interventions, NNS beverages had no postprandial glucose and endocrine effects similar to controls (generally, low to moderate confidence). Conclusions: The available evidence suggests that NNS beverages sweetened with single or blends of NNS have no acute metabolic and endocrine effects, similar to water. These findings provide support for NNS beverages as an alternative replacement strategy for SSBs in the acute postprandial setting.

Zou, X., et al. Determination of Eight High-Intensity Sweeteners in Alcohol Beverages by HPLC-MS/MS, Changsha, PEOPLES R CHINA.
	A HPLC-MS/MS method for the determination of acesulfame-K, saccharin, cyclamate, notate, aspartame, all-time, stevioside and sucralose in alcohol beverages has been developed. The HPLC separation was carried out on a ZORBAX SB-C18 column (4.6mm x 50mm, 1.8 mu m). The results demonstrated that the separation can be completed by gradient elution with 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% formic acid acetonitrile as the mobile phase. The column temperature was kept at 30 degrees C. When the analyses were detected by ESI-MS/MS under multiple reaction monitoring mode, the calibration curves showed good linearity in the concentration range of 0.01 mg/L -1 mg/L for sweeteners. The correlation coefficients (r2) of the calibration curve were >0.9997. The limits of quantification of the eight sweeteners were 0.002 mg/L -0.0035 mg/L. The obtained recoveries at three tested concentration levels varied from 83.5% to 100.42%, with relative standard deviations lower than 2.33 %. The proposed method has been successfully applied to the determination of the eight sweeteners in beers, wine and white spirits.

